# Georgia - Making the recovery sustainable : country economic update

Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Macroeconomics, Trade and
Investment Global PracƟce

January 1 – December 31
Exchange Rate Effective as of 
February 5, 2018
Georgian Lari (GEL)
GEL2.4638
Metric System

GEUAA 
Georgia EU Association Agreement
ADB 
Asian Development Bank
BP 
British Petroleum
CAD 
Current Account Deficit
CAR 
Capital Adequacy Ratio
CEU 
Country Economic Update
CIT 
Corporate Income Tax
CPI 
Consumer Price Index
DCFTA 
Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area
DIS 
Deposit Insurance System
EBRD 
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
 
 
Development
ECA 
Europe and Central Asia
ECOPA 
European Consensus-Platform for 
 
 
Alternatives
EU 
European Union
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment
FIZ 
Free Industrial Zone
FSI 
FSAP 
Financial Sector Assessment Program
FX 
Foreign Exchange
GDDG 
Georgian Dream Democratic Georgia
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product
GEL 
Georgian Lari
Geostat 
State Department of Statistics of Georgia
GR 
Georgian Railway
GOGC 
Georgian Oil and Gas Corporation
HH 
Household

IFC 
International Finance Corporation
IFI 
International Financial Institution
IMF 
International Monetary Fund
MoF 
Ministry of Finance
MLT 
Medium and Long Term
MOLHSA Ministry of Labor, Health and Social Affairs
MPs 
Members of the Parliament
NBG 
National Bank of Georgia
NDI 
National Democratic Institute
NPL 
Non-Performing Loans
PIM 
Public Investment Management
PER 
Public Expenditure Review
PIT 
Personal Income Tax
PPAs 
Power Purchasing Agreements
PPP 
Public Private Partnership
PPT 
Percentage Point
ROA 
Return on Assets
ROE 
Return on Equity
SOEs 
State Owned Enterprises
SMEs 
Small and medium enterprises
UHC 
Universal Healthcare 
USAID 
United States Agency for International 
 
 
Development
VAT 
Value Added Tax
UNM 
United National Movement
WB 
World Bank
WDI 
World Development Report

Overview....................................................................................................................................1
A. Recent Socio-Economic Developments.............................................................................................3
 
Recent Political Events......................................................................................................................3
 
Growth and Inflation........................................................................................................................4
 
External sector................................................................................................................................7
 
Financial sector...............................................................................................................................9
 
Social sector.................................................................................................................................11
B. Macroeconomic Policies and Structural Reforms...............................................................................13
 
Assessment of fiscal and debt policies.................................................................................................13
 
Assessment of monetary and exchange rate policies...............................................................................15
 
Ongoing structural reforms...............................................................................................................16
C. Economic Outlook and Risks........................................................................................................18
 
Baseline scenario...........................................................................................................................18
 
Risks and Mitigation.......................................................................................................................22
D. Focus Note: FDI and Economic Performance in Georgia.......................................................................23
Overview.........................................................................................................................................23
1. Introduction and Literature Review....................................................................................................24
2. Dynamics of FDI............................................................................................................................25
3. Drivers and Constraints for FDI..........................................................................................................27
 
3.1 Human Capital and Inadequately Educated Workforce........................................................................28
 
3.2 Infrastructure...........................................................................................................................29
 
3.3 Global factors..........................................................................................................................30
 
3.4 Legal framework and government policy.........................................................................................31
 
3.5 Taxation..................................................................................................................................31
 
3.6 Macroeconomic stability.............................................................................................................32
4. FDI and Economic growth - Theory......................................................................................................33
 
4.1 FDI and Economic growth – Empirical Literature...............................................................................33
 
4.2 FDI, Gross Capital Formation and GDP growth..................................................................................33
 
4.3 FDI and the Current Account Deficit...............................................................................................34
 
4.4 FDI and Trade...........................................................................................................................35
 
4.5 FDI and Productivity..................................................................................................................37
 
4.6 FDI and employment..................................................................................................................38
References.................................................................................................................................40

Figures
Figure 1. Georgia GDP Growth and Per Capita GDP bottomed up in 2017..........................................................5
Figure 2. Georgia performed better than many ECA countries, 2016-2017e........................................................5
Figure 3. Consumption has moderated......................................................................................................6
Figure 4. Growth concentrated in services.................................................................................................6
Figure 5. Current Account Deficit further improved along with trade balance in 2017...........................................7
Figure 6. Public, Private Debt slightly increased..........................................................................................7

Figure 7: Tourism is the fastest growing sector............................................................................................8
Figure 8: Composition of external debt reveal vulnerabilities, end-September 2017.............................................9
Figure 9. Credit growth recovered in 2017...............................................................................................10
Figure 10. Dollarization of loans declined in 2017......................................................................................10
Figure 11. Poverty Indicators improved (2003-2019)...................................................................................11
Figure 12. Labor force participation rate (2016).........................................................................................11
Figure 13. A Fiscal Consolidation has started ...........................................................................................14
Figure 14. Social spending is the largest component, 2017...........................................................................14
Figure 15: NBG tightened monetary policy...............................................................................................16
Figure 16: Nominal exchange rate remains volatile (GEL/$)..........................................................................16
Figure 17. Public Debt Sustainability.......................................................................................................21
Figure 18. External Debt Sustainability....................................................................................................21
Figure 19: Global FDI flows increased (1990-2016) ....................................................................................24
Figure 20: Overall dynamics of FDI in Georgia is positive (million$, % of GDP)...................................................26
Figure 21: Georgia’s FDI performed better than many ECA countries,..............................................................26
Figure 22: FDI by economic sectors, share in total, 2007-2016 .....................................................................29
Figure 23: Top 5 problematic factors for doing business in Georgia................................................................29
Figure 24: Decomposition of real growth.................................................................................................34
Figure 25: FDI and Gross fixed capital formation........................................................................................34
Figure 26: Saving-Investment Balance.....................................................................................................34
Figure 27: Current Account Deficit.........................................................................................................34
Figure 28: Trade and consumption of electricity........................................................................................37
Figure 29: Productivity-real value added per employed person, 2016 (GELm)...................................................37

Tables
Table 1. Selected Macroeconomic and Social Indicators, 2013-2020...............................................................18
Table 2. Fiscal accounts, 2013-2020 .......................................................................................................19
Table 3. External Financing Requirements and Sources................................................................................20
Table 4: The structure of FDI by country..................................................................................................27
Table 5: Linkages with partners in 2016, percentage of total.........................................................................30
Table 6: Correlation coefficients of FDI to trade indicators (2007-2016)...........................................................35
Table 7: correlation coefficients of employment to FDI and Investment in Fixed Assets........................................39
Table 8: Correlation coefficients of FDI to Investment in Fixed Assets..............................................................39
 
Box
Box 1. Key Constitutional Amendments....................................................................................................3
Box 2. The tax reform in Estonia............................................................................................................32

This edition of Georgia’s Country Economic Update (CEU) is part of a semi-annual series designed to monitor 
socio-economic developments in Georgia. It presents a concise analysis of political, economic and social de-
velopments, as well as the progress achieved with the implementation process of structural reforms during 
2016. It also includes a focus note on Georgia’s foreign direct investment (FDI). This edition of the Georgia 
Economic Report was prepared by the World Bank economic team working on Georgia—Mariam Dolidze 
(Senior Economist), with input from David Keshelava (Consultant), Natalia Tsivadze (Financial Sector Spe-
cialist) Inga Paichadze (Senior Communications Officer), under the guidance and supervision of Genevieve 
Boyreau (EFI Program Leader) and Maria Gonzalez-Miranda (Practice Manager), and Tamuna Namicheishvili 
(Program Assistant) provided administrative support. Photo on the cover page is a courtesy of Mr. Vakhtang 
Kuntsev-Gabashvili.

Maria Gonzalez-Miranda
Practice Manager
Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment Global Practice

The growth drivers shifted 
from public spending in 2016 
to net exports in 2017.

The government accelerated 
the implementation of 
structural reform along with 
the improved macro-fiscal 
stance in 2017.

Following the 2016 October 
parliamentary elections, 
the ruling party initiated a 
process of much-debated and 
wide-ranging constitutional 
amendments.

The Parliament of Geor-
gia approved the draft 
Constitution on Septem-
ber 26, owing to a ma-
jority vote by the ruling 
party. The draft did not 
obtain the support of the 
opposition parties, the 
President, nor civil soci-
ety representatives, be-
cause of the lack of con-
sensus on critical issues 
such as the electoral sys-
tem and the presidential 
elections. The Georgian 
Dream recently initiated 
a new round of the con-
stitutional 
amendment 
process to incorporate 
the Venice Commission 
recommendations in the 
newly-adopted 
Consti-
tution. According to the 
amendments, 
parties 
will be allowed to form 
election blocs for the 
next parliamentary elec-
tion in 2020. Also, the 
so-called bonus system, 
which entails transfer of 
votes of the parties that

Box 1. Key Constitutional Amendments
Under 
the 
new 
Constitution, 
direct 
presidential elections are to be abolished in 
2024, and the country will transfer to fully 
proportional parliamentary representation; 
electoral blocs will no longer be allowed and 
the 5 percent threshold will remain intact.
 Georgia will switch to fully proportional

 The 2020 parliamentary elections will be

held using the current mixed electoral 
system, where voters elect 73 MPs in 
majoritarian, single-seat constituencies, 
while the remaining 77 seats are 
distributed proportionally in the closed 
party-list contest; The threshold for 
entering the Parliament will be reduced 
to 3 percent and parties will be allowed 
to form electoral blocs. 
 The President will no longer be elected

through direct ballot, transferring the 
mandate to the college of electors 
composed of 300 members, including 
MPs, local and regional government 
representatives. The 2018 presidential 
election, however, will still be held 
directly; 
 Selling agricultural lands to foreign

nationals will be prohibited. 
 The opposition rights in parliament will

be boosted, including by permitting them 
to create investigative commissions.

fail to cross the parliamentary threshold entirely to the winner, will be 
scrapped. Amendments will also be introduced to the provisions re-
lated to the Constitutional Court. The constitutional bill includes other 
changes as well, which have not been agreed with the Venice Commis-
sion1, including to Article 5 of the new constitution, which defines the 
principles of a social state. The new constitution will enter into force 
following the next presidential election in fall of 20182.

1 The Venice Commission is the Council of Europe’s advisory body on constitutional matters. Its role is to provide legal advice to 
its member states and, in particular, to help states wishing to bring their legal and institutional structures into line with European 
standards and international experience in the fields of democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
2 Exact date will be defined later.

On October 21, 2017, Georgian 
citizens headed to polls to 
elect 2058 members of 64 city 
councils (Sakrebulo) and 64 
municipal mayors.

The contribution of investment 
to growth moderated in the 
first three quarters of the year.

3 Geostat’s flash growth estimates 2017 is 4.8 percent.

Figure 1. Georgia GDP Growth and Per Capita GDP 
bottomed up in 2017
(Percent)`

Figure 2. Georgia performed better than many ECA 
countries, 2016-2017e
(%, $US)

Source: Estimates based on Geostat statistics.
Source: WDI, Bank staff calculations.

Figure 3. Consumption has moderated
(Contributions, growth %)

Figure 4. Growth concentrated in services 
(Contributions, growth %)

I 14 II 14 III 14 IV 14 I 15 II 15 III 15 IV 15 I 16 II 16 III 16 IV 16 I 17* II 17*
III
17*
Agriculture
Manufacturing
ConstrucƟon
Services
Net Taxes
GDP

I 14
II 14 III 14 IV 14
I 15
II 15 III 15 IV 15 I 16* II 16*
III
16*
IV
16*
I 17* II 17*
III
17*
net exports
Change in Inventories
Gross Fixed Capital FormaƟon
Public ConsumpƟon
Private ConsumpƟon
GDP

Construction and trade were 
the top two sectors driving 
growth in the first three 
quarters of 2017.

Annual inflation was at 6.7 
percent in 2017, exceeding 
NBG’s target.

Figure 5. Current Account Deficit further improved 
along with trade balance in 2017
(% of GDP)

Figure 6. Public, Private Debt slightly increased 
(% of GDP)

External proceeds from tourism 
and workers’ remittances 
continued to improve through 
2017.

Figure 7: Tourism is the fastest growing sector
(# of persons, m GEL)

Source: Ministry of Economy of Georgia and Staff calculations.

External financing requirements 
fell in-line with the positive 
developments of the current 
account.

Net FDI inflows increased in the first three quarters of 2017 to 10.6 
percent of GDP year-on-year (compared to 9.1 percent of GDP a year 
earlier), which exceeded the current account deficit and added to the 
international reserves. Net inflows of FDI largely originated from Azer-
baijan, Turkey, and the UK (see the Focus Note). FDI inflows were di-
rected into the transport, construction and real estate sectors. In ad-
dition to FDI, new borrowings were disbursed from the IFIs and other 
development partners to the public sector. Donor concessional funding 
exceeded 3.3 percent of GDP. At the same time, debt repayments of the 
private sector exceeded the new external borrowings in the first three 
quarters of 2017; as a result, net borrowing was negative. During this 
9-month period, the NBG accumulated gross international reserves of 
about $269m or 2.2 percent of GDP, comfortably meeting the target 
established under the new IMF program4.

4 The IMF Executive Board Approved US$285.3 million Extended Arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility for Georgia on April 
12, 2017.

Total external debt 
reached $16.7 bil-
lion as of end-Sep-
tember 2017, and 
112.3 Percent of 
GDP 
(was 
109.6 
percent 
of 
GDP 
by 
end-Septem-
ber 2016) (figure 
6). During the first 
three 
quarters 
of 2017 the debt 
stock 
increased 
by $932m, out of 
which $518m rep-
resented 
newly 
contracted 
debt. 
The central govern-
ment external debt 
reached 34.6 percent of GDP by the end of September, while public 
sector debt (including the NBG and public enterprises, in addition to 
the general government) held 48 percent of GDP, equivalent to 43 per-
cent of total debt (Figure 8). Debt of public corporations includes the 
Georgian Oil and Gas Corporation (Eurobond of US$250 million), the 
Georgian Railways (Eurobond of $670 million), Marabda-Kartsakhi Rail-
way (US$560 million). The short-term debt, which amounted to about 
22 percent of total debt by the end of September 2017, mostly con-
sists of trade credits, owned by non-financial corporations, deposits of 
non-residents in the banking sector of Georgia, and short-term inter-
company loans by foreign direct investors.

Figure 8: Composition of external debt reveal 
vulnerabilities, end-September 2017
(% of total)

Source: Ministry of Economy of Georgia and Staff calculations.

The credit issued by commercial banks to the national economy ex-
panded by 18 percent, and total banking sector assets increased by 22 
percent in 2017(figure 9). The capital adequacy of the banking sector 
(CAR) stood at 19.1 percent in December 2017, exceeding the NBG reg-
ulatory required ratio of 10.5 percent. The liquid-to-total assets ratio 
was at 21.3 percent. Profitability remains high, with a return on equity 
(ROE) and return on assets (ROA) at 20.7 percent and 2.8 percent, re-
spectively. Nonperforming loans (NPLs) are lower than in neighboring 
countries, and on a declining trend—falling to 6.0 percent in Decem-
ber 2017, compared with 7.3 percent in 2016. NPLs under the IMF FSI 
methodology were reported at about 3.5 percent. Strict banking super-
vision, reasonable underwriting standards of the banks and continued 
credit growth have added to solid performance of the sector. At the 
same time, systemic financial sector vulnerabilities are high - the mar-
ket share of the top 2 banks, retail loan growth, and, high dollarization – 
against the backdrop of weak financial safety nets and a deficient crisis 
preparedness framework.

The top banks in Georgia 
became both larger as a 
proportion of GDP and more 
concentrated in terms of 
market share.

Figure 9. Credit growth recovered in 2017
(percent)

Figure 10. Dollarization of loans declined in 2017
(percent)

FX loans, % of total loans
FX deposits, % of total deposits

5 Both of these commercial banks are domestic (owned by local investors).

Figure 11. Poverty Indicators improved (2003-2019)
Figure 12. Labor force participation rate (2016)

Source: WB staff estimates based on Geostat HIS data.
Source: World Bank database.

6 This refers to the 40 percent of population with the lowest income.

B. Macroeconomic Policies and Structural Reforms

7 Around GEL300m in VAT collected in 2016 remained unidentified as a particular type of tax and considered as overpayment due to 
temporary technical issues following the introduction of treasury single taxpayers’ account. As a result of the inaccurate baseline of 
2016, VAT collections were underestimated in the 2017 budget.

Figure 13. A Fiscal Consolidation has started 
(% of GDP)

Figure 14. Social spending is the largest component, 2017
(expenditure composition, % of GDP)

According to the Fiscal Risks Annex to the 2018 Budget Law prepared by 
the MOF, liabilities of the 43 high-risk SOEs reached 12.8 percent of GDP 
by the end of 2016, 87 percent of which were concentrated in 3 compa-
nies: Marabda-Kartsakhi Railway Company (44 percent of total), Georgian 
State Electrosystem (27 percent) and Georgian United Water Company 
(16 percent). The liabilities of the 33 medium-risk SOEs were about 7.4 
percent of GDP concentrated in companies such as Georgian Railway 
(GR), Georgian Oil and Gas Corporation (GOGC), Commercial Operator 
of Elecro-power System. The government is committed to monitor and 
manage quasi-fiscal liabilities and operations under the IMF program. In

8 Includes external and domestic debt plus soviet times historical non-interest debt of about 1.9 percent of GDP.
9 Debt Sustainability Analysis, WB and IMF estimates.

Assessment of monetary and exchange rate policies

Monetary policy is geared 
towards maintaining price 
stability within the inflation 
targeting framework.

Figure 15: NBG tightened monetary policy
(percent)

Figure 16: Nominal exchange rate remains volatile 
(GEL/$)

The government that took 
office in late 2016 outlined a 
Four-Point-Program consistent 
with the main objective of the 
Socioeconomic Development 
Strategy of Georgia, “Georgia 
2020”.

• A Public Investment Management (PIM) framework was set up to 
strengthen the monitoring of public investment; a dedicated public 
investment unit was established at the MoF; and the Tbilisi Munic-
ipality has begun using the PIM Guidelines as part of a pilot involv-
ing 5 other municipalities. Following training of municipality staff, a 
project concept note was prepared in the appropriate. A new PPP 
law that is integrated with the overall investment plan and budget 
cycle was prepared and endorsed by the government, and a PPP 
Unit has been created at the Prime Minister Office;

• In the 2018 Budget Law, the Fiscal Risk Annex includes a quantita-
tive reporting of quasi-fiscal relationships, and expands the analy-
sis of contingent liabilities associated to SOEs;

Table 1. Selected Macroeconomic and Social Indicators, 2013-2020p

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017e
2018p
2019p
2020p

(Percent change, unless otherwise indicated)
National Accounts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Real GDP (percent change) 
3.4
4.6
2.9
2.7
4.2
4.3
4.6
5.0
GDP nominal (in billions of U.S. dollar)
16,140
16,508
13,988
14,333
15,150
16,350
16,350
18,960
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
3,600
3,676
3,767
3,853
4,120
4,373
4,671
4,980
Consumer price index
-0.5
3.1
4.0
2.1
6.7
3.1
3.0
3.0
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Investment and saving
Gross investment (in percent of GDP)
24.8
29.8
31.5
32.4
31.5
33.1
33.5
33.7
 Public
5.9
5.6
5.6
5.1
6.2
6.5
7.2
8.0
 Private
18.9
24.2
25.9
27.3
25.3
26.6
26.3
25.7
National Savings
19.1
19.2
19.6
19.5
22.0
23.7
24.2
24.7

General Government Operations
 
 
 
 
Revenues and grants 
27.5
28.0
28.1
28.4
29.4
29.0
28.7
28.5
  Of which: Tax revenues
24.8
25.1
25.1
25.8
26.5
26.0
26.0
25.9
 Grants
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.9
1.0
Expenditure and net lending 
30.1
31.0
31.9
32.5
32.8
32.4
32.0
31.5
 Current expenditure
24.3
25.4
24.9
26.1
24.5
24.0
23.3
22.4
 Of which: interest payments
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.2
1.5
 Capital expenditure and net lending
5.9
5.6
7.0
6.4
8.3
8.5
8.7
9.1
Primary balance
-1.7
-2.1
-2.8
-2.9
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1
-1.6
Overall fiscal balance
-2.6
-2.9
-3.8
-4.1
-3.4
-3.4
-3.3
-3.0
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
External Sector
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Current account balance
-5.8
-10.6
-11.9
-12.8
-9.5
-9.4
-9.3
-9.0
  Exports of goods and services
44.5
42.6
44.6
43.8
50.0
50.6
50.2
49.8
  Imports of goods and services
57.4
60.6
62.3
59.5
61.8
62.6
62.1
61.7
 Remittances
4.7
4.6
4.2
4.3
4.8
4.7
4.8
5.0
FDI (net)
5.1
8.1
9.0
9.3
9.2
9.0
9.1
9.2
Gross International Reserves
 (in months of total imports)
3.4
3.4
3.3
3.6
4.0
3.9
3.9
4.0
 (in billions of dollars)
2.8
2.7
2.5
2.8
3.0
3.4
3.7
4.2

Source: Georgian authorities; and Bank staff estimates and projections.

The 2018 approved Budget 
is consistent with the 
government medium-term 
plan to enhance revenue 
measures and contain current 
spending.

Table 2. Fiscal accounts, 2013-2020
(In percent of GDP)

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017e
2018p
2019p
2020p

Overall fiscal balance
-2.6
-2.9
-3.8
-4.1
-3.4
-3.4
-3.3
-3.0
Primary Balance
-1.7
-2.1
-2.8
-2.9
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1
-1.6
Revenues and grants
27.5
28.0
28.1
28.4
29.4
29.0
28.7
28.5
Taxes
24.8
25.1
25.1
25.8
26.5
26.0
26.0
25.9
Non-tax revenues
2.7
2.9
3.0
2.6
2.9
3.0
2.6
2.6
Total expenditure and net lending
30.1
31.0
31.9
32.5
32.8
32.4
32.0
31.5
Current expenditure
24.3
25.4
24.9
26.1
24.5
24.0
23.3
22.4
 Wages and salaries
5.3
5.2
5.0
5.2
4.4
4.4
4.2
4.0
 Goods and services
3.8
3.9
3.8
4.1
4.1
3.8
3.4
3.2
 Interest payments
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
 Subsidies and grants
2.1
2.2
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.0
 Social expenses
8.5
9.6
9.6
10.1
9.6
9.5
9.4
9.3
 Other expenses
3.7
3.6
3.1
3.2
2.8
3.0
2.9
2.5
Capital expenditure and net lending
5.9
5.6
7.0
6.4
8.3
8.5
8.7
9.1
Government Financing
External
0.6
1.7
2.1
2.2
1.8
2.5
2.6
2.2
Domestic
1.5
0.8
0.6
0.8
0.9
0.5
0.5
0.6
Privatization
0.5
0.4
1.1
1.1
0.7
0.4
0.2
0.2

Source: Georgian authorities; and Bank and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Table 3. External Financing Requirements and Sources 
(percent of GDP)

Overall fiscal balance
17.3
17.8
17.0
16.7
16.8
17.1
Requirements
9.5
9.5
9.3
9.0
9.0
8.7
Current Account Deficit
6.4
6.8
6.9
7.2
7.2
7.8
Medium and long-term debt
5.4
5.5
5.3
5.4
5.3
5.7
 Private 
1.8
2.0
1.7
1.7
1.5
1.7
 Banks
3.6
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
4.0
 Corporates
1.1
1.3
1.6
1.8
1.9
2.1
 Public
1.2
1.5
0.8
0.5
0.6
0.6
Others (net)
18.0
17.9
17.8
18.0
18.2
17.7
Sources
9.2
9.0
9.1
9.2
9.2
9.1
 Foreign Investment (net) 
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
 Portfolio Investment (net)
8.0
8.3
8.2
8.3
8.5
8.2
 MLT Disbursements
5.5
5.5
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.7
 Private 
2.5
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
 Banks
3.0
3.1
3.0
3.0
3.0
2.7
 Corporates
2.5
2.8
3.2
3.3
3.5
3.5
 Public (only project loans)
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
 Short-term & other capital (net)
0.5
0.4
1.1
1.1
0.7
0.4

Source: DSA, IMF and WB staff estimates.

Figure 17. Public Debt Sustainability
Figure 18. External Debt Sustainability

Source: IMF DSA framework and WB staff calculations.

10 Estimate of overvaluation or maximum historical movement of the exchange rate.
11 Higher by 25 basis points.

D. Focus Note: FDI and Economic Performance in Georgia

The government implemented number of important institutional re-
forms to this end, including a simplified and streamlined taxation sys-
tem, a transparent and open governance structure, better legal system, 
enhanced property rights and sound prudential regulation and super-
vision of the banking system. Georgia improved its ratings in Doing 
Business survey to top ten. Other cross-country surveys suggest that 
impressive progress has been achieved in economic freedom (#13 out 
of 180 countries), trade openness (#41 out of 160 countries), and fight-
ing corruption (#44 out of 176 countries).

At the same time inflows 
of FDI have increased 
considerably since 2004.

- There is a significant 
concentration of FDI in 
the large transport-related 
projects in Georgia;

With FDI rising worldwide over 
the last decade (Figure 19), 
there are ongoing discussions 
related to the impact it has 
on the economy of the host 
country.

Figure 19: Global FDI flows increased (1990-2016)12 
(billion$)

Source: International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments database.

12 Horizontal lines on the graph represents average FDI per decade.

Until 2003, both foreign and domestic investments in the country were 
limited by an absence of sustainable economic and political institutions, 
the lack of regulatory frameworks and a high level of corruption. From 
1997 to 2002, FDI in Georgia amounted to US$166 million per year on 
average, which constituted 5 percent of GDP. From 2003, as a result of

successful structural reforms implemented by the new political regime, 
FDI started to pick up. This period also coincided with the accelerat-
ed growth of the global economy, but it ended in 2008 as a result of 
the global financial crisis and the Russian military invasion of Georgia. 
During the period 2003-2008, net FDI inflow to Georgia reached record 
levels – amounting to US$1 billion per year on average, which consti-
tuted 12.1 percent of GDP. In the post-war and post-crisis period, FDI to 
Georgia and its share in GDP fell sharply; however, in 2014, as a result 
of the large infrastructure projects launched by BP and Azerbaijan, net 
FDI inflows increased once more amounting to an average of US$1.2 
billion per year (8.1 percent of GDP).

Figure 21: Georgia’s FDI performed better than
many ECA countries 
(1997-2016 average, % of GDP)

Figure 20: Overall dynamics of FDI in Georgia 
is positive 
(million$, % of GDP)

Source: Geostat, World Bank.
Source: World Bank.

The structure of top source 
countries by share of total FDI 
has remained relatively stable 
over the last two decades.

Table 4: The structure of FDI by country
Share, %

Country
Share (%)
Country
Share (%)
Country
Share (%)

1
United States
40.5
United Kingdom
12.2
Azerbaijan
19.5

2
United Kingdom
8.7
United States
10.0
Netherlands
12.5

3
Turkey
8.6
Turkey
7.6
United Kingdom
10.2

5
Australia
5.7
United Arab Emirates
7.2
Luxembourg
5.9

6
Austria
3.8
Virgin Islands, British
7.0
United States
5.3

8
Azerbaijan
2.6
Kazakhstan
5.1
United Arab Emirates
4.3

9
Cyprus
2.5
Cyprus
4.7
Czech Republic
3.2

10
Norway
2.5
Czech Republic
4.6
Russia
3.1

3.1 Human Capital and Inadequately Educated Workforce

According to the Global 
Competitiveness Report (2017-
18), an inadequately educated 
workforce is the most 
problematic factor for doing 
business (see Figure 23).

Figure 22: FDI by economic sectors, 2007-2016
(share in total, %)

Figure 23: Top 5 problematic factors for doing 
business in Georgia
(%)

Source: Geostat.
Source: The Global Competiiveness Report 2017-18.

road transport – from 124 mln 
Euro in 2008 (1.5 percent of 
GDP) to more than 224 mln 
Euro in 2014 (about 2 percent 
of GDP).

Table 5: Linkages with partners in 2016, percentage of total 
(%)

Source: Geostat, Georgian National Tourism Administration (GNTA).

3.4 Legal framework and government policy

4.1 FDI and Economic growth – Empirical Literature

There is no consensus in the 
empirical literature about 
the direction of the causal 
relationship between FDI and 
economic growth.

According to the literature, there are four common outcomes of causality 
analysis: (1) the positive contribution of FDI in economic growth is clear 
and does not depend on any additional conditions/factors (e.g. Campos 
et al. (2002); Melnyk et al. (2014)); (2) FDI has a positive impact on real 
GDP growth, but only for countries that have a sufficient level of human 
capital, an appropriate trade policy, enough absorptive capability and/or 
a friendly business climate (e.g. Alfaro et al. (2008)); (3) FDI does not have 
any significant influence on economic growth (e.g. Lyroudi et al. (2004); 
Carkovic & Levine (2002); Herzer et al. (2007)); and (4) FDI has a negative 
impact on economic performance (e.g. Mencinger et al. (2003))

Although much of the 
literature tests the causal 
relationship between FDI and 
economic growth for a country 
group, very few studies 
investigate this issue on the 
national level (and only one 
study does this for Georgia).

Guersoy and Kalyoncu (2012) studied the connection between FDI and 
GDP growth in Georgia over the period 1997-2010. The authors conduced 
Engel-Granger cointegration and Granger causality tests and found that 
these two variables are cointegrated and there is unilateral causality be-
tween them – it is only FDI that causes GDP growth and not vice-versa.

4.2 FDI, Gross Capital Formation and GDP growth

Figure 25: FDI and Gross fixed capital formation
(million$, %)

Figure 24: Decomposition of real growth
(%, contributions)

FDI as a Share of Gross Fixed Capital Formation

Source: Geostat and staff calculations.
Source: Geostat, NBG and staff calculations.

Georgia is a country with 
a low domestic savings rate. 
As a result, savings as a share 
of GDP are much lower than 
investment.

Figure 27: Current Account Deficit 
(% of GDP)

Figure 26: Saving-Investment Balance
(% of GDP)

Current account deﬁcit ﬁnanced by debt instrument (%)

Table 6: Correlation coefficients of FDI to trade indicators (2007-2016)

FDI stock in 
transports and 
communications

Imports of Capital goods (except transport equipment)
0.32
0.74
0.34
0.66

Imports Transport equipment and parts
0.15
0.39
0.00
0.25

Exports of transport services
-0.03
0.90
0.19
0.79

Exports through pipeline transport and electricity 
transmission
-0.27
0.79
0.17
0.75

Nearly 25 percent of FDI in 
Georgia during last ten years 
went into transport and 
communications.

13 The contact came into force in 2000.
14 The total amount is calculated based on average import price of 2016 and the total amount of electricity country would have to 
import in case of no increase in domestic generation.

Figure 28: Trade and consumption of electricity
Figure 29: Productivity-real value added per
employed person, 2016 
(GELm)

ProducƟvity
Total ProducƟvity
ProducƟvity Gain from 2006-2016

Sectors that were the most attractive for foreign investors stand as the 
most productive sectors in the country. For example, top 3 the most 
productive sector16: transport and communication sector, construction

17 Real value added is computed based on the sectorial GDP deflator.
18 The source of this statistical data is business statistics, provided by Geostat and do not contain information about self-employed 
people and their contribution to the national economy. However, sectors that are dominated by self-employed workers (for example 
agriculture) are still the least productive sectors after taking into consideration of them (“Structural Transformation in Georgia – In the 
Right Direction at a Turtle’s Pace” (2016), Davit Keshelava).

Table 7: correlation coefficients of employment to FDI and Investment in Fixed Assets

Economic Sector
Investments in 
fixed assets
FDI

Agriculture, hunting and forestry
0.78
-0.22

Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles
 and personal and household goods
0.66
-

Real estate, renting and business activities 
0.95
-0.21

Community, social and personal service activities
0.24
-

Table 8: Correlation coefficients of FDI to Investment in Fixed Assets

Real estate, 
renting and 
business activ-
ities

Total
Agriculture, 
fishing
Construction
Hotels and 
restaurants

Alfaro, L. C.-O. (2004). FDI and economic growth: The role of local financial markets. Journal of Internation-
al Economics, 89-112.

Asian Development Bank (ADB). (2009). Technical Assistance to the Republic of Georgia for Preparing the 
Ajara Bypass Roads Development Project. Transport Sector Review.

Asian Development Bank (ADB). (2014). Georgia Transport Sector Assessment, Strategy, and Road Map. 
Asian Development Bank Publication.

Asian Development Bank (ADB). (2015). Financial Soundness Indicators for Financial SectorStability in 
GEORGIA.

Blomström, M. K. (2001). The determinants of host country spillovers from foreign direct investment: a 
review and synthesis of the literature. Palgrave Macmillan UK., 34-65.

Campos, N. F. (2002). Foreign direct investment as technology transferred: Some panel. The Manchester 
School, 70(3),, 398-419.

Carkovic, M. V. (2002). Does foreign direct investment accelerate economic growth? U of Minnesota De-
partment of Finance Working Paper.

Economic Policy Research Center (EPRC). (2014). Management of Non-Performing Loans in Georgia - Anal-
ysis and Recommendations.

Forum, W. E. (2016). The Global Competitiveness Report 2016–2017.
Gürsoy, F., & Kalyoncu, H. (2012). Foreign Direct Investment and Growth Relationship in Georgia. Interna-
tional Journal of Economics and Financial Issues, 267-271.

Herzer, D. K.-L. (2007). In search of FDI-led growth in developing countries: The way forward. Economic 
Modeling, 793-810.

Hlavacek, P., & Bal-Domanska, B. (2016). Impact of Foreign Direct Investment on Economic Growth in Cen-
tral and Eastern European Countries. Inzinerine Ekonomika-Engineering Economics, 294–303.

Larsen, J. (2017). Georgia-China relations: the Geopolitis of the Belt and Road. Tbilisi: Georgian Institute 
of Politics .

Livny, E., & Biermann, F. (2016). Georgian Haves and Have-Nots. Who’s to Blame and What to Do? IS-
ET-Blog.

Lyroudi K., P. J. (2004). Foreign Direct Investment and Economic Growth in Transition Economies. South 
Eastern Europe Journal of Economics, 97-110.

Melnyk, L., Kubatko, O., & Pysarenko, S. (2014). The Impact of Foreign Direct Investment on Economic 
Growth: Case of Post Communism Transition Economies. Problems and Perspectives in Management .

Mencinger, J. (2003). Does Foreign Direct Investment Always Enhance Economic Growth? KYKLOS Interna-
tional Review for Social Science, 491-508.

Mosiashvili, N., & Pkhakadze, N. (2015, February 27). Making Sense of FDI Dynamics. Tbilisi, Georgia.
Movchan, V., & Saha, D. (2016). FDI-attraction from non-EU countries: The role of the EU-Georgia DCFTA 
and tariff rate differentials. Berlin/Tbilisi: German Economic Team Georgia in cooperation with ISET. Retrieved 
from http://www.get-georgia.de/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/PS_01_2016_en.pdf

Neuhaus, M. (2006). The impact of FDI on economic growth: an analysis for the transition countries of. 
Springer Science & Business Media.

Schoors, K. v. (2002). The Productivity Effect of Foreign Ownership on Domestic Firms in Hungary. EEA 
Venice Conference Paper.

World Bank. (2013). Georgia Skills Mismatch and Unemployment Labor Market Challenges. WB.
Yu, N. T. (2011). Technology Spillovers from FDI: The Case of ASEAN. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1970015 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1970015.

5a, Nino Ramishvili Street
Tbilisi, 0179, Georgia
T: (99532) 229 6221
www.worldbank.org.ge