# fed financial stability report 2025 11

BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

The Federal Reserve System is the central

bank of the United States. It performs five key

functions to promote the effective operation

of the U.S. economy and, more generally, the

■conducts the nation’s monetary policy to promote maximum employment

■promotes the stability of the financial system and seeks to minimize

and contain systemic risks through active monitoring and engagement in

■promotes the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions

and monitors their impact on the financial system as a whole;

■fosters payment and settlement system safety and efficiency through

services to the banking industry and U.S. government that facilitate

U.S.-dollar transactions and payments; and

■promotes consumer protection and community development through

consumer-focused supervision and examination, research and analysis of

emerging consumer issues and trends, community economic development

activities, and administration of consumer laws and regulations.

To learn more about us, visit www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed.htm.

Purpose and Framework. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii

Overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

1  Asset Valuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Box 1.1. Artificial Intelligence and Algorithmic Trading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2  Borrowing by Businesses and Households. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3  Leverage in the Financial Sector. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

4  Funding Risks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

Box 4.1. A More Targeted Assessment of Short-Term Funding Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

5  Near-Term Risks to the Financial System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

Box 5.1. Survey of Salient Risks to Financial Stability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

Appendix:  Figure Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

Revisions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

Note: This report generally reflects information that was available as of October 23, 2025.

This report presents the Federal Reserve Board’s current assessment of the stability of the U.S.

financial system. By publishing this report, the Board intends to promote public understand-

ing by increasing transparency around, and creating accountability for, the Federal Reserve’s

views on this topic. Financial stability supports the objectives assigned to the Federal Reserve,

including full employment and stable prices, a safe and sound banking system, and an efficient

A financial system is considered stable when

More on the Federal 
Reserve’s Monitoring Efforts

banks, other lenders, and financial markets

are able to provide households, communities,

and businesses with the financing they need

See the Financial Stability section of the 
­Federal Reserve Board’s website for more 
information on how the Federal Reserve 
monitors the stability of the U.S. and world 
financial systems.

to invest, grow, and participate in a well-­

when hit by adverse events, or “shocks.”

Consistent with this view of financial stabil-

ity, the Federal Reserve Board’s monitoring

• a more detailed look at our monitoring 
framework for assessing risk in each 
­category;

framework distinguishes between shocks to,

and vulnerabilities of, the financial system.

Shocks are inherently difficult to predict,

• more data and research on related topics;

while vulnerabilities, which are the aspects

• information on how we coordinate, cooper-
ate, and otherwise take action on financial 
system issues; and

of the financial system that would exacerbate

stress, can be monitored as they build up or

• public education resources describing the 
importance of our efforts.

recede over time. As a result, the framework

focuses primarily on assessing vulnerabilities,

with an emphasis on four broad categories

and how those categories might interact to

drops in asset prices (see Section 1, Asset Valuations).

1 For a review of the research literature in this area, see Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2015), 
“Financial Stability Monitoring,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, vol. 7 (December), pp. 357–95.

and causing losses for investors (see Section 2, Borrowing by Businesses and Households).

and businesses, further weakening economic activity (see Section 3, Leverage in the

institutions (see Section 4, Funding Risks).

vulnerabilities. This report reflects market conditions and data as of October 23, 2025.

Overview of financial system vulnerabilities

ﬁnancial sector
Funding risks
Borrowing by businesses

• Total business and 
household debt 
relative to GDP was 
stable at 20-year lows.

credit cards and auto loans remained above pre-pandemic levels (see Section 2, Borrowing by

notable. Over the past few years, hedge funds’ leverage has steadily increased across a broad

range of strategies, including those involving Treasury securities, interest rate derivatives,

and equities. Leverage at life insurers was in the top quartile of its historical distribution. The

capital levels well above regulatory requirements. Fair value losses on fixed-rate assets

declined but were still sizable and continued to be sensitive to changes in long-term interest

rates. Bank credit to other financial entities continued to increase, and growth was most

notable in the category of special purpose entities, collateralized loan obligations (CLOs),

and asset-backed securities. Broker-dealer leverage remained near historical lows, and

intermediation activity was historically high across a range of markets, including Treasury

markets (see Section 3, Leverage in the Financial Sector).

continued to grow; the main contributor to this growth was government money market funds

(MMFs), which historically have been the least susceptible to large-scale investor redemptions.

Assets in more fragile investment vehicles, expressed as a share of GDP, remained near the

median of the historical distribution (discussed in the box “A More Targeted Assessment of

Short-Term Funding Risk”). Banks’ reliance on uninsured deposits, an important component

of their funding risk, was well below the peaks in 2022 and early 2023. Life insurers’

nontraditional liabilities grew further, although they represent only a small share of general

account assets (see Section 4, Funding Risks).

the most frequently cited risks to U.S. financial stability by a wide range of market contacts who

participated in the Survey of Salient Risks during September and October. The most frequently

cited topics from survey respondents were policy uncertainty, geopolitical risks, higher long-term

rates, persistent inflation, and a sharp decline in asset prices, potentially connected to a turn in

Survey of salient risks to the financial system

Survey respondents cited several risks to the U.S. financial system and the broader global economy. For more 
information, see the box “Survey of Salient Risks to Financial Stability.”

Since April, price declines across multiple markets have largely reversed and volatility has

Treasury market liquidity recovered to levels well above the lows seen in April. During that epi-

Equity markets rebounded from April’s volatility and declines. Corporate bond spreads have nar-

rowed over that same period and stayed well below their historical medians.

ending July 2025, nominal house prices grew between 0.3 and 1.7 percent depending on the

Table 1.1 shows the sizes of the asset markets discussed in this section. The two largest asset

markets are those for public equities and residential real estate, which are substantially larger

than the next two markets, Treasury securities and CRE. The table also shows recent and his-

torical growth rates for each asset class. The remainder of this section presents the status of

the longer end of the Treasury yield curve has steepened. A model-based estimate of the nom-

inal Treasury term premium—a measure of the compensation that investors require to hold

longer-term Treasury securities rather than shorter-term ones—fell a bit to its historical median,

Table 1.1. Size of selected asset markets

Residential real estate
61,101 
1.4 
6.2

Commercial real estate
20,524 
−5.6 
5.4

Investment-grade corporate bonds
8,156 
4.3 
7.8

High-yield and unrated corporate bonds
1,724 
5.2 
6.1

Note: The data extend through 2025:Q2. Outstanding amounts are in nominal terms. Growth rates are nominal and
are measured from Q2 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q2 of the ﬁnal year of the period. Equi-
ties, real estate, and farmland are at nominal market value; bonds and loans are at nominal book value.

1 The amount outstanding shows institutional leveraged loans and generally excludes loan commitments held by
banks. For example, lines of credit are generally excluded from this measure. Average annual growth of leveraged
loans is from 2001 to 2025:Q2, as this market was fairly small before then.

2 One-year growth of commercial real estate prices is from June 2024 to June 2025, and average annual growth is
from June 1999 to June 2025. Both growth rates are calculated from equal-weighted nominal prices deﬂated using
the consumer price index (CPI).

3 One-year growth of residential real estate prices is from June 2024 to June 2025, and average annual growth is
from June 1998 to June 2025. Nominal prices are deﬂated using the CPI.

Source: For leveraged loans, PitchBook Data, Leveraged Commentary & Data; for corporate bonds, Mergent, Inc., Fixed
Income Securities Database; for farmland, Department of Agriculture; for residential real estate price growth, Cotality;
for commercial real estate price growth, CoStar Group, Inc., CoStar Commercial Repeat Sale Indices; for all other
items, Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States.”

Figure 1.1. Nominal Treasury yields declined and remained above their average levels over the past 
15 years

Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.15, “Selected Interest Rates.”

Figure 1.2. An estimate of the nominal 
Treasury term premium remained near its 
historical median

Figure 1.3. Interest rate volatility returned to 
its median since 2005

Source: For data through July 13, 2022, Barclays 
and S&P Global; for data from July 14, 2022, onward, 
ICAP, Swaptions and Interest Rate Caps and 
Floors Data.

Source: Department of the Treasury; Wolters Kluwer, 
Blue Chip Financial Forecasts; Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York; Federal Reserve Board staff estimates.

earnings ratio, defined as the ratio of equity prices to expected 12-month earnings, remained

ratio and the real 10-year Treasury yield—a crude measure of the additional return that investors

its historical median (figure 1.5).2 Two measures of equity market volatility—option-implied and

Figure 1.4. The price-to-earnings ratio of S&P 500 firms was once again close to the upper end of its 
historical range

Source: LSEG, Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System, North American Summary & Detail Estimates, Level 2, Current 
& History Data, Adjusted and Unadjusted, https://www.lseg.com/en/data-analytics/financial-data/company-data/
ibes-estimates.

2 This estimate is constructed based on expected corporate earnings for 12 months ahead.

Figure 1.5. As of October, an estimate of the 
equity premium was near a 20-year low

Figure 1.6. Volatility in equity markets 
declined to below the historical median

Option-implied volatility
Realized volatility

Source: LSEG, Institutional Brokers’ Estimate 
System, North American Summary & Detail 
Estimates, Level 2, Current & History Data, Adjusted 
and Unadjusted, https://www.lseg.com/en/
data-analytics/financial-data/company-data/ibes-
estimates.

Source: Cboe Volatility Index® (VIX®) accessed via 
Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Federal Reserve Board staff 
estimates.

April report and below the long-term median (figure 1.7). Spreads relative to comparable-

maturity Treasury securities settled at historically tight levels below those observed before the

April market events—about 0.7 percentage points below the historical median for triple-B rated

and about 1.6 percentage points below the median for high-yield (figure 1.8). The excess bond

premium for all nonfinancial corporate bonds—a measure of the risk premium required by bond

investors after controlling for bond characteristics and credit quality—was below the median of

its historical distribution (figure 1.9).

Figure 1.7. Corporate bond yields fell slightly 
but remained near their median for the past 
30 years

Figure 1.8. Corporate bond spreads fell and 
remained at tight levels

1997
2004
2011
2018
2025
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

1997
2004
2011
2018
2025
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24

Triple-B (left scale)
High-yield (right scale)

Source: ICE Data Indices, LLC, used with permission.

Source: ICE Data Indices, LLC, used with permission.

Figure 1.9. The excess bond premium was below its long-run average

1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
−2

Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on Lehman Brothers Fixed Income Database (Warga); 
Intercontinental Exchange, Inc., ICE Data Services; Center for Research in Security Prices, CRSP/Compustat Merged 
Database, Wharton Research Data Services; S&P Global, Compustat.

Issuance in the corporate bond market picked up to a solid pace in August and September, on

par with the average over the past 10 years. Market-based forecasts of one-year-ahead default

probabilities of nonfinancial firms (a forward-looking indicator of credit quality) settled to levels

Since the previous report, the average spread on leveraged loans in the secondary market

decreased moderately and remained at the low end of its historical distribution since 2009

Figure 1.10. Spreads on leveraged loans decreased moderately to the low end of their distribution 
since 2009

1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
0

Source: PitchBook Data, Leveraged Commentary & Data.

Treasury and equity market liquidity was strained in April and has 
since recovered

the financial system. Amid the April volatility, Treasury market liquidity hit historically low levels.

Since then, various measures of Treasury market liquidity, including two different measures of

market depth in the most liquid on-the-run segment, indicated that liquidity increased back to or

above previous levels across all maturities (figures 1.11 and 1.12).

Figure 1.11. Treasury market depth recovered from April’s low levels

5-day moving average
Millions of dollars
Millions of dollars

5-year (right scale)
10-year (right scale)
30-year (left scale)

Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.

Figure 1.12. While 2-year on-the-run Treasury market depth remained close to historical lows, 10-year 
market depth rose to levels last seen in 2021

5-day moving average
Millions of dollars
Millions of dollars

2-year OTR market depth (right scale)
10-year OTR market depth (left scale)

Oct.
Feb.
June
Oct.
Feb. June
Oct.
Feb. June
Oct.
Feb. June
Oct.
Feb.
June
Oct.
Feb. June
Oct.

Source: BrokerTec; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations.

A measure of market liquidity in equity markets stayed below the historical average since 2019

liquidity in corporate bond markets remained robust and in line with the average level observed in

Figure 1.13. A measure of liquidity in equity markets stayed below average

5-day moving average
Market depth (number of contracts)

Source: LSEG, Tick History; Federal Reserve Board staff calculations.

Commercial real estate prices showed signs of further stabilization

Aggregate CRE prices measured in inflation-

Figure 1.14. Inflation-adjusted commercial 
real estate prices were little changed

adjusted terms showed signs of further stabi-

lization, following significant declines between

Source: Zillow, Inc., Real Estate Data; Cotality Real Estate Data; S&P Cotality Case-Shiller Home Price Indices.

Figure 1.18. Model-based measures of house price valuations cooled from near historically high levels

Owners’ equivalent rent
Market-based rents

1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
−30

Source: For house prices, Zillow, Inc., Real Estate Data; for rent data, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Figure 1.19. House price-to-rent ratios dropped slightly yet remained elevated across 
geographic areas

1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
50

Source: For house prices, Zillow, Inc., Real Estate Data; for rent data, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Figure 1.20. Inflation-adjusted farmland prices rose further in 2025 from already elevated levels

1969
1977
1985
1993
2001
2009
2017
2025
1000

Source: Department of Agriculture; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis staff calculations.

Figure 1.21. Farmland prices relative to rents increased to historical highs in 2025

1969
1977
1985
1993
2001
2009
2017
2025
5

Source: Department of Agriculture; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis staff calculations.

Box 1.1. Artiﬁ cial Intelligence and Algorithmic Trading

Algorithmic trading refers to automated, computer-driven trading based on predefi ned trading strat-
egies. Algorithms have long been used by various market participants for market making, optimal 
execution, statistical arbitrage, and speculative trading.1 Traditional algorithms are fast, simple rules 
operating at nanosecond frequencies, but they are relatively rigid and hard-coded. Generative AI and 
machine learning add self-learning based on historical experience, adaptation based on current mar-
ket conditions, and analysis of unstructured data, such as text. The greater model complexity and the 
use of additional information by AI currently come at the cost of reduced speed, and thus the suitabil-
ity of the latest AI models for trading decisions depends on the application. This box examines the 
adoption of AI in algorithmic trading and discusses its fi nancial stability implications. The box leans 
on academic research, institutional market outreach, and conversations with key market participants.

1 See Andrei Kirilenko and Andrew W. Lo (2013), “Moore’s Law versus Murphy’s Law: Algorithmic Trading and Its Discontents,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 27 (Spring), pp. 51–72.

2 See International Monetary Fund (2024), “Advances in Artificial Intelligence: Implications for Capital Market Activities,” 
chapter 3 in Financial Stability Report (Washington: IMF, October), pp. 77–105, https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/
Issues/2024/10/22/global-financial-stability-report-october-2024; International Organization of Securities Commissions 
(2025), Artificial Intelligence in Capital Markets: Use Cases, Risks, and Challenges (Madrid: IOSCO, March), https://www.iosco.
org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD788.pdf.

3 See Anne Lundgaard Hansen and Seung Jung Lee (2025), “Financial Stability Implications of Generative AI: Taming the 
Animal Spirits,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2025-090 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, September), https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2025.090.

4 See Álvaro Cartea, Patrick Chang, and Gabriel García-Arenas (2025), “Spoofing and Manipulating Order Books with Learning 
Algorithms,” available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4639959 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4639959.

5 See Pedro Gurrola-Perez and Kaitao Lin (2024), “An Analysis of Market Manipulation Definitions around the World,” working 
paper (London: World Federation of Exchanges, June).

6 See Winston Wei Dou, Itay Goldstein, and Yan Ji (2025), “AI-Powered Trading, Algorithmic Collusion, and Price Efficiency,” 
NBER Working Paper Series 34054 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July), https://www.nber.org/
papers/w34054.

7 See Laura Veldkamp (2024), Discussion of “AI-Powered Trading, Algorithmic Collusion, and Price Efficiency” by Winston Wei Dou, 
Itay Goldstein, Jan Ji, NBER Summer Institute, July.

Borrowing by Businesses and 
Households
2

decline relative to GDP, with the debt-to-GDP ratio at its lowest level in two decades (figure 2.1).

(figure 2.2). Business debt-to-GDP (blue line) edged down but remained near the 75th percentile

of its historical range. The household debt-to-GDP ratio (black line) continued to tick downward

Figure 2.1. The total debt of businesses and households relative to GDP remained at its lowest level 
in over 20 years

1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
0.8

Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on Bureau of Economic Analysis, national income and 
product accounts, and Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States.”

Figure 2.2. Both business and household debt-to-GDP ratios continued to fall

1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
0.3

Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on Bureau of Economic Analysis, national income and 
product accounts, and Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States.”

For additional context, table 2.1 shows the amounts outstanding and recent historical growth

rates of different forms of debt owed by nonfinancial businesses and households as of the

Table 2.1. Outstanding amounts of nonﬁnancial business and household credit

Total private nonﬁnancial credit
42,235 
1.8 
5.3

Total nonﬁnancial business credit
21,863 
2.1 
5.7

Corporate business credit
13,965 
1.7 
5.2

Bonds and commercial paper
8,654 
2.7 
5.5

Noncorporate business credit
7,897 
2.8 
6.7

Commercial real estate credit
3,396 
2.0 
6.0

Note: The data extend through 2025:Q2. Outstanding amounts are in nominal terms. Growth rates are nominal and
are measured from Q2 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q2 of the ﬁnal year of the period. The
table reports the main components of corporate business credit, total household credit, and consumer credit. Other,
smaller components are not reported. The commercial real estate (CRE) row shows CRE debt owed by both nonﬁnan-
cial corporate and noncorporate businesses as deﬁned in Table L.220: Commercial Mortgages in the “Financial
Accounts of the United States.” Total household-sector credit includes debt owed by other entities, such as nonproﬁt
organizations. GDP is gross domestic product.

1 Leveraged loans included in this table are an estimate of the leveraged loans that are made to nonﬁnancial busi-
nesses only and do not include the small amount of leveraged loans outstanding for ﬁnancial businesses. The
amount outstanding shows institutional leveraged loans and generally excludes loan commitments held by banks.
For example, lines of credit are generally excluded from this measure. Average annual growth of leveraged loans is
from 2001 to 2025:Q2, as this market was fairly small before then.

Source: For leveraged loans, PitchBook Data, Leveraged Commentary & Data; for GDP, Bureau of Economic Analysis,
national income and product accounts; for all other items, Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial
Accounts of the United States.”

The growth rate of nonfinancial business debt adjusted for inflation turned slightly positive

to around 1 percent in the first half of 2025 (figure 2.3). Net issuance of risky debt—defined

as issuance of high-yield bonds, unrated bonds, and leveraged loans minus retirements and

Borrowing by Businesses and Households 
19

Figure 2.3. Business debt adjusted for inflation turned slightly positive

1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
−10

Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States.”

retirements of high-yield and unrated bonds (figure 2.4). Privately held firms account for roughly

60 percent of the total outstanding debt of U.S. nonfinancial firms. These firms tend to have less

access to capital markets and primarily borrow from banks, private credit funds, and other institu-

Figure 2.4. Net issuance of risky debt fell in the middle of 2025

Institutional leveraged loans
High-yield and unrated bonds

2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
2019
2022
2025
−60
−40
−20

Source: Mergent, Inc., Fixed Income Securities Database; PitchBook Data, Leveraged Commentary & Data.

Gross leverage—the ratio of debt to assets—of all publicly traded nonfinancial firms was flat

through the second quarter of 2025 (figure 2.5). Net leverage—the ratio of debt less cash to

total assets—increased slightly in recent quarters. While both gross and net leverage remained

little changed since the April report (figure 2.6).

Debt-to-asset ratios increased on bank commercial and industrial loans but remained below

pre-pandemic levels. This was true for both privately held and publicly traded firms (figure 2.7).

Figure 2.5. Gross leverage of publicly traded 
nonfinancial firms leveled off but was still high 
by historical standards

Figure 2.6. Interest coverage ratios, which 
indicate firms’ ability to service their debt, 
were largely unchanged

Median for all public ﬁrms
Median for all non-investment-grade public ﬁrms

Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations 
based on S&P Global, Compustat.

Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations 
based on S&P Global, Compustat.

Figure 2.7. Firms with commercial and 
industrial bank loans increased their 
leverage slightly

issued loans to large corporations with debt

multiples—defined as the ratio of debt to

earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation,

and amortization—greater than 4 increased

moderately to above the historical median

Privately held ﬁrms
Publicly traded ﬁrms

mostly, but not exclusively, privately held

firms, gross and net leverage ratios declined

modestly but remained above their historical

Source: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-14Q 
(Schedule H.1), Capital Assessments and Stress 
Testing.

Figure 2.8. Newly issued leveraged loans with debt multiples greater than 4 increased moderately to 
above the historical median

Debt multiples ≥ 6x
Debt multiples 5x–5.99x
Debt multiples 4x–4.99x
Debt multiples < 4x

Source: Mergent, Inc., Fixed Income Securities Database; PitchBook Data, Leveraged Commentary & Data.

Borrowing by Businesses and Households 
21

leveraged loan borrowers stayed near its historical lows. ICRs of smaller and riskier firms, includ-

default rate on leveraged loans stayed well below its historical median (figure 2.9, black line).

However, defaults including distressed exchanges, which reflect the number of defaults and dis-

tressed loans that have been renegotiated between the borrower and the lender, continued to be

elevated relative to history (figure 2.9, blue line).

Figure 2.9. The realized default rate on leveraged loans remained well below its previous peaks

Realized default rate
Realized default rate incl. distressed exchanges

Source: PitchBook Data, Leveraged Commentary & Data.

Private credit remains a small fraction of outstanding nonfinancial business debt, and growth

seemed to have slowed somewhat this year. Based on available data for privately held firms that

have borrowing activities from large banks, the ICR for the median firm continued its downward

increased but remained low at a value of around 2. Aggregate leverage of privately held firms was

environment of the past few years has only

partially passed through to household interest

Mortgage debt accounted for roughly three-fourths of total household debt. Housing leverage—

measured as outstanding mortgage loan balances relative to home values—remained subdued

(figure 2.11). When measured relative to market prices (blue line), outstanding mortgage bal-

ances continued to sit well below previous peaks. Outstanding mortgage loan balances relative to

an estimate of home values from a model using rents and other market fundamentals were some-

what higher but remained far below earlier peaks (black line). The overall mortgage delinquency

rate remained at the lower end of its historical distribution in the first half of 2025 (figure 2.12).

5 This survey’s data are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s website at https://www.kansascityfed.
org/surveys/small-business-lending-survey/.

Borrowing by Businesses and Households 
23

Figure 2.11. Measures of housing leverage 
stayed significantly below their peak levels

Figure 2.12. Mortgage delinquency rates 
edged down and remained close to the low 
end of their historical distribution

Relative to model-implied values
Relative to market value

Mortgages in loss mitigation
All mortgages

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer 
Credit Panel/Equifax; Zillow, Inc., Real Estate Data; 
Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics.

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer 
Credit Panel/Equifax.

New mortgage extensions declined slightly for

Figure 2.13. Very few homeowners had 
negative equity in their homes

borrowers with a prime credit score (the group

with the largest share) and for borrowers

with near-prime credit scores but increased

slightly for borrowers with subprime credit

scores over the past year (figure 2.14). As of

the fourth quarter of 2024, the early payment

becoming delinquent within one year of mort-

gage origination—remained somewhat above

the median of its historical distribution.

Figure 2.14. New mortgage extensions increased for subprime borrowers

2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Annual

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax; consumer price index, Bureau of Labor 
Statistics via Haver Analytics.

Consumer debt accounted for the remaining

Figure 2.15. Consumer debt balances were 
largely unchanged for student and auto loans 
and for credit cards

one-fourth of household debt and consisted

primarily of student, auto, and credit card

loans. Balances were broadly unchanged in

2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000

inflation-adjusted terms relative to the previ-

The average maturity of auto loans at origina-

tion for used cars was near historical highs

for borrowers with a nonprime credit score

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer 
Credit Panel/Equifax; consumer price index, Bureau 
of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics.

auto loans in delinquent status was largely unchanged from the previous report and stood at a

level somewhat above its historical median (figure 2.17).

Figure 2.16. The average maturity of loans at 
origination for used cars remained elevated for 
nonprime borrowers

Figure 2.17. Auto loan delinquencies remained 
above the historical median

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer 
Credit Panel/Equifax.

The stock of outstanding credit card debt shifted slightly to subprime borrowers over the first

half of 2025 (figure 2.18). Credit card delinquency rates remained flat in the first half of 2025

after reaching their highest level since 2010 in the previous year (figure 2.19). The stabilization

Borrowing by Businesses and Households 
25

Figure 2.18. Inflation-adjusted credit card 
balances for subprime borrowers were up 
slightly

Figure 2.19. Credit card delinquencies remained 
slightly above their long-term median

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer 
Credit Panel/Equifax.

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer 
Credit Panel/Equifax; consumer price index, Bureau 
of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics.

6 Income and credit score are not strongly correlated; see Rachael Beer, Felicia Ionescu, and Geng Li (2018), “Are 
Income and Credit Scores Highly Correlated?” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, August 13), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2235.

In the first quarter of 2025, hedge fund leverage was as high as it has been since comprehensive

data have been collected. Hedge funds’ use of leverage increased across a range of trading strat-

egies supporting large positions in Treasury securities, interest-rate derivatives, and equities. Life

insurers’ leverage was in the upper quartile of its historical distribution.

Table 3.1 shows the sizes and growth rates of assets of financial institutions discussed in

sure of bank capital adequacy, remained at historically high levels across bank types (figure 3.1).

Banks’ return on equity—a measure of profitability—remained within recent historical ranges

through the second quarter of 2025 (figure 3.2).7

Table 3.1. Size of selected sectors of the ﬁnancial system, by types of institutions and vehicles

Banks and credit unions
28,576 
3.7 
5.5

Note: The data extend through 2025:Q2 unless otherwise noted. Outstanding amounts are in nominal terms. Growth
rates are nominal and are measured from Q2 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q2 of the ﬁnal year
of the period. Life insurance companies’ assets include both general and separate account assets.

1 Hedge fund data start in 2012:Q4 and are updated through 2025:Q1. Growth rates for the hedge fund data are
measured from Q1 of the year immediately preceding the period through Q1 of the ﬁnal year of the period.

2 Broker-dealer assets are calculated as unnetted values.

3 Non-agency securitization excludes securitized credit held on balance sheets of banks and ﬁnance companies.

Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release Z.1, “Financial Accounts of the United States”; Federal Reserve
Board, “Enhanced Financial Accounts of the United States.”

Figure 3.1. Banks’ average risk-based capital ratios remained near previous peaks

Source: Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial Statements for Holding Companies.

of banks’ available-for-sale (AFS) and held-to-maturity (HTM) portfolios were below their book

portfolios—a measure of the sensitivity of the market value of assets to changes in interest

Figure 3.2. Returns on equity for banks were at typical levels

2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
−5

Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (Call 
Report) Form FFIEC 031; Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial Statements for Holding 
Companies.

Figure 3.3. The fair value losses of banks’ securities portfolios decreased but remained sizable

Available-for-sale securities
Held-to-maturity securities

2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
−800

Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (Call 
Report) Form FFIEC 031; Federal Reserve Board, Form FR Y-9C, Consolidated Financial Statements for Holding 
Companies.

An alternative measure of bank capital—the ratio of tangible common equity to total tangible

assets, which, unlike the CET1 ratio, does not factor in the riskiness of assets but does include fair

value declines on AFS securities for all banks—increased for large non–G-SIBs and regional banks

but remained below its median level over the past decade for all bank categories (figure 3.4).