# fed monetary policy report 2025 02

For use at 11:00 a.m. EST
February 7, 2025

BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System

The President of the Senate 
The Speaker of the House of Representatives

The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report 
pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act.

Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v

Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii

Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Recent Economic and Financial Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Monetary Policy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Special Topics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Recent Economic and Financial Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Domestic Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
  Box 1.  Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
  Box 2.  Labor Productivity since the Start of the Pandemic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Financial Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
  Box 3.  Developments Related to Financial Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
International Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

Monetary Policy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

Box 4.  Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets. . . . . . . 42
Box 5.  Periodic Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications. . . . . . . . . 45
Box 6.  Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

Summary of Economic Projections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

Box 7.  Forecast Uncertainty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

Appendix: Source Notes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

This report reflects information that was publicly available as of 9 a.m. EST on February 6, 2025.

Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data,

February 4, 2025; for monthly data, December 2024; and, for quarterly data, 2024:Q4.

In bar charts, except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter

from the final quarter of the preceding period.1

1 For figures 27 and 38, note that the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index, the S&P 500 Index, and the 
Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been licensed for 
use by the Board. Copyright © 2025 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its affiliates. All 
rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited without written 
permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s indices, 
please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and 
Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, 
Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors make any representation or war-
ranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that 
it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, 
nor their third-party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data 
included therein.

Statement on Longer-Run Goals 
and Monetary Policy Strategy

Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as reaffirmed effective January 30, 2024

EPOP ratio
employment-to-population ratio

FOMC
Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee

JOLTS
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey

ON RRP
overnight reverse repurchase agreement

OPEC
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries

QCEW
Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages

SLOOS
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices

VIX
implied volatility for the S&P 500 index

Inflation moderated a little further last year after having slowed notably in 2023, but it remains

somewhat above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objective of 2 percent. The labor

market appears to have stabilized following a period of easing, with the unemployment rate flat-

tening out at a relatively low level over the second half of last year. Real gross domestic product

(GDP) increased solidly last year, supported by strength in consumer spending.

As labor market tightness continued to ease and inflation moderated a bit further, the FOMC

lowered the target range for the policy rate by a cumulative 100 basis points over its September,

November, and December meetings, bringing it to the current range of 4¼ to 4½ percent. The

Federal Reserve has also continued to reduce its holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage-

Recent Economic and Financial Developments

cent. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 2.6 percent over the

12 months ending in December, down from a peak of 7.2 percent in 2022. The core PCE price

measure produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, showed more marked deceleration

in prices last year. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations are within the range of values

seen in the decade before the pandemic and continue to be broadly consistent with the FOMC’s

longer-run objective of 2 percent inflation.

easing. The unemployment rate moved up over the first half of last year but was mostly flat there-

Economic activity. Real GDP is reported to have increased last year by 2.5 percent, a little slower

ing a bit from post-pandemic highs. Even so, in absolute levels, significant disparities in groups

remain. (See the box “Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups.”)

Strong productivity growth. Labor productivity in the business sector increased 1.8 percent

per year, on average, since the fourth quarter of 2019, stronger than its 1.5 percent average

Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and money markets. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance

sheet has declined since June as the FOMC has continued to reduce its securities holdings.

Usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility decreased further, while reserve

balances were little changed. Conditions in money markets remained stable. (See the box

“Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”)

Framework review. The Federal Reserve has begun its periodic public review of the monetary

policy framework it uses to pursue its dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price sta-

bility. The review is focused on the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy

Strategy, which articulates the Committee’s approach to monetary policy, and the Committee’s

policy communications tools. Like the Federal Reserve’s 2019–20 review of its monetary policy

framework, the current review will include outreach and public events attended by policymakers,

community leaders, experts from outside the Federal Reserve System, and other members of the

public. (See the box “Periodic Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications.”)

Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which prescribe a setting for the policy inter-

guidance to policymakers. With inflation easing and the unemployment rate having increased

somewhat, the policy rate prescriptions of most simple monetary policy rules have generally

declined since 2023. Currently, most of the rules call for levels of the federal funds rate that are

conflicts in the Middle East (figure 3). More

recently, however, oil prices increased amid

Brent spot price
24-month-ahead futures contracts

Note: The data are monthly averages of daily data 
and extend through January 31, 2025.

PCE food prices increased a modest 1.6 per-

cent last year, a second year of low increases

following the much larger increases in 2021

across other agricultural commodities have

Industrial metals
Agriculture and livestock

Note: The data are monthly averages of daily data 
and extend through January 31, 2025.

account for a large share of expenditures.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
7

25 percent higher than before the pandemic.

Core goods prices have been declining slightly, close to pre-pandemic declines . . .

Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization who cite insufficient labor or materials as reasons

rose 2.4 percent over the year (figure 6).

Figure 5. Reasons for operating below full 
capacity

Insufﬁcient supply of labor
Insufﬁcient supply of materials

Note: The series are the share of firms selecting 
each reason for operating below full capacity. The 
data extend through 2024:Q3.

the 12 months ending in December, down from 6.3 percent in 2023 and 7.7 percent in 2022.

Figure 7. Measures of rental price inflation

PCE housing services prices
Apartment List single-family and multifamily units
Zillow single-family units
RealPage multifamily units
CoreLogic single-family detached units

2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024

Note: Zillow data start in January 2016, and Apartment List data start in January 2018. CoreLogic data extend 
through November 2024. Apartment List, Zillow, RealPage, and CoreLogic measure market-rate rents—that is, rents 
for a new lease by a new tenant. PCE is personal consumption expenditures.

Finally, prices for core nonhousing services—a broad group that includes services such as

of core services, which account for roughly three-fourths of core nonhousing services, prices

increase in 2023. Market-based core services include components such as food service and

price inflation for the “non-market-based” category, where prices are imputed and which includes

some volatile categories such as portfolio management that tend to be heavily influenced by idio-

3 The market-based services prices are derived from specific consumer price indexes or producer price indexes associ-
ated with observable market transactions, whereas the non-market-based services prices are imputed to account for 
the value of the service provided because no observable transactions are available.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
9

horizon from surveys of households (such as the University of Michigan Surveys of Consum-

forecaster in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of

Philadelphia, continued to expect inflation to average 2 percent over the five years beginning five

Similarly, market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation, which are based on

financial instruments linked to inflation such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, are also

Figure 8. Measures of inflation expectations

Figure 9. Inflation compensation implied by 
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities

1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5

Michigan survey median, next 12 months
Michigan survey median, next 5 to 10 years
SPF, next 10 years
SPF, 6 to 10 years ahead

Note: The data for the Michigan survey are monthly 
and extend through January 2025. The data for the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) are quarterly.

Note: The data are at a business-day frequency and 
are estimated from smoothed nominal and inflation-
indexed Treasury yield curves.

inflation more closely—rose along with inflation in 2020 and 2021 but then moved back down

through the end of 2024. More recently, the median value for expected inflation over the next

year from the University of Michigan survey moved up some in December and January. Even so,

both this measure and a similar measure from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of

relative to historical experience, the labor force participation rate (LFPR) among workers aged

25 to 54 remained above its high from the years just before the pandemic, and job vacancies

were at a strong level. For the year, employment rose moderately, layoffs remained low, and wage

After gradually increasing over much of 2023,

the unemployment rate rose somewhat fur-

ther in the first half of last year, from 3.8 per-

June 2024. However, it was mostly unchanged

thereafter, ending the year at 4.1 percent—

sex, and racial and ethnic groups, unemploy-

still relatively low levels (figure 11). (The box

graphic Groups” provides further details.)

Figure 11. Unemployment rate, by race and ethnicity

Black or African American
Hispanic or Latino
White
Asian

2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024

Note: All data displayed are 3-month moving averages. Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a 
percentage of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Small 
sample sizes preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not 
reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Similar to the unemployment rate, measures of job vacancies—which had been gradually moving

lower since mid-2022—also appear to have stabilized over the second half of last year. For exam-

ple, job openings as measured in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), as well

as an alternative measure using job postings data from the large online job board Indeed, edged

down, on net, over the first half of last year and flattened out more recently. In December, both

measures were a bit above their 2019 average levels.4

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
11

box 1. Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups

Figure a. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, 
by group

Percentage points
Sex and educational attainment

Asian
White
Black or African American
Hispanic or Latino

Women, some college or more
Women, high school or less
Men, some college or more
Men, high school or less

Note: The data are 3-month moving averages. Prime age is 25 to 54. All series are seasonally adjusted by 
Federal Reserve Board staff.

1 In figures A and B, EPOP ratios are shown indexed to their 2019 average; therefore, gaps between groups are not 
readily evident.

2 As monthly series have greater sampling variability for smaller groups, we do not plot EPOP ratio estimates for American 
Indians or Alaska Natives.

3 For a discussion of the contribution of educational attainment to prime-age female labor force participation before the 
pandemic, see Didem Tüzemen and Thao Tran (2019), “The Uneven Recovery in Prime-Age Labor Force Participation,” Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, vol. 104 (Third Quarter), pp. 21–41, https://www.kansascityfed.org/
Economic%20Review/documents/652/2019-The%20Uneven%20Recovery%20in%20Prime-Age%20Labor%20Force%20
Participation.pdf. For a discussion on access to remote work and participation rates, see Maria D. Tito (2024), “Does the 
Ability to Work Remotely Alter Labor Force Attachment? An Analysis of Female Labor Force Participation,” FEDS Notes (Wash-
ington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.3433.

4 Calculations of the series shown are as described in Alison Weingarden (2017), “Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and 
Non-metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities,” FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, September 25), https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2063. Larger metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) are 
defined as metropolitan areas with a population greater than 500,000 or more, while smaller MSAs are those with a popula-
tion between 100,000 and 500,000. Non-MSAs consist of counties without strong commuting ties to an urbanized center.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
13

Figure b. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, by 
metropolitan status and education

Note: The data are 3-month moving averages. Prime age is 25 to 54. Larger metropolitan statistical areas 
(MSAs) consist of 500,000 people or more, and smaller MSAs consist of 100,000 to 500,000 people. All series 
are seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board staff.

2024; however, by the end of the year, wage growth had edged down for this group, and growth had 
become similar across all quartiles.5

5 To reduce noise due to sampling variation, which can be pronounced when considering disaggregated groups’ wage changes, 
the series shown in figure C are the 12-month moving averages of the groups’ median 12-month real wage change. Thus, by 
construction, these series lag the actual real wage changes.

Figure C. Median real wage growth, by group

1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile

High school or less
Associate’s degree
Bachelor’s degree or more

Note: Series show 12-month moving averages of the median percent change in the hourly wage of individuals 
observed 12 months apart, deflated by the 12-month moving average of the 12-month percent change in the 
personal consumption expenditures price index. In the top-left panel, workers are assigned to wage quartiles 
based on the average of their wage reports in both Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group 
interviews; workers in the lowest 25 percent of the average wage distribution are assigned to the 1st quartile, 
and those in the top 25 percent are assigned to the 4th quartile.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
15

Job gains eased some last year, slowing from

a strong average monthly pace of 267,000 in

the first quarter to a more moderate 159,000

(figure 12).5 Job growth remained relatively

strong in health care and state and local

Note: The data shown are a 3-month moving average 
of the change in nonfarm payroll employment.

Initial unemployment claims (right scale)
JOLTS layoff rate (left scale)

2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025

Note: The data for initial claims are reported as a 4-week moving average and extend through January 18, 2025. The 
data for the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) layoff rate are monthly. Series are truncated at the top 
of the figure in 2020 and 2021.

Figure 14. Labor force participation rate

Note: Values before January 2024 are estimated 
by Federal Reserve Board staff to eliminate 
discontinuities in the published history.

Regarding population growth, the Census Bureau now estimates that immigration increased

strongly from 2022 through June 2024, contributing to strong annual population growth over this

period.6 While official Census Bureau immigration estimates are unavailable after June, more

As labor demand has slowed further, labor demand and supply have continued to move into

before the pandemic; for example, the gap between the number of total available jobs (measured

by employed workers plus job openings) and the number of available workers (measured by the

size of the labor force) averaged 0.8 million in the fourth quarter of last year—well below its 2022

peak of 6.0 million and somewhat below its 2019 average (figure 15). Additionally, the

6 See U.S. Census Bureau (2024), “Net International Migration Drives Highest U.S. Population Growth in Decades,” 
press release, December 19, https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2024/population-estimates-
international-migration.html.

7 Some of these more recent indicators include data from the Department of Homeland Security on encounters 
between migrants and Customs and Border Patrol agents on the southwest border; see U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security (2025), “Immigration Enforcement and Legal Processes Monthly Tables,” webpage, https://ohss.dhs.gov/
topics/immigration/immigration-enforcement/immigration-enforcement-and-legal-processes-monthly.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
17

Figure 15. Available jobs versus available workers

2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024

Note: Available jobs are employment plus job openings as of the end of the previous month. Available workers are 
the labor force. Data for employment and labor force before January 2024 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board 
staff to eliminate discontinuities in the published history.

share of respondents to the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Survey who say that jobs

are plentiful, and the monthly percentage of the workforce that has quit their job as measured in

JOLTS (an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects), are also somewhat below 2019

levels (but above their ranges that prevailed over much of the previous expansion). Similarly, the

unemployment rate in December was about ½ percentage point higher than its 2019 average

Labor productivity in the business sector

increased 1.97 percent in 2024 (figure 16).

94
96
98
100
102
104
106
108
110
112
114
116

onset of the pandemic, but looking through

this volatility, average labor productivity since

4 Evidence is mixed on how prevalent AI use is in the workplace currently. For example, the Census Bureau’s Business Trends 
and Outlook Survey reports that, as of January, only around 6 percent of firms reported using AI in production, and around 
10 percent planned to do so in the next six months. That said, some other surveys indicate higher usage among firms. For 
example, 25 percent of service firms and 16 percent of manufacturing firms that responded to an August 2024 survey by 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York reported using AI in production; see Jaison R. Abel, Richard Deitz, Natalia Emanuel, 
and Benjamin Hyman (2024), “AI and the Labor Market: Will Firms Hire, Fire, or Retrain?” Liberty Street Economics (blog), 
September 4, https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2024/09/ai-and-the-labor-market-will-firms-hire-fire-or-retrain). 
Some worker-based surveys also point to a substantial share of workers using AI-enabled tools in their workflow—for exam-
ple, one recent survey found that one-fourth of workers used generative AI in their work over the previous week; see Alexander 
Bick, Adam Blandin, and David J. Deming, “The Rapid Adoption of Generative AI,” NBER Working Paper Series 32966 (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September), https://www.nber.org/papers/w32966; and Conference 
Board (2023), “Majority of U.S. Workers Are Already Using Generative AI Tools—But Company Policies Trail Behind,” press 
release, September 13, https://www.conference-board.org/press/us-workers-and-generative-ai.

5 For an estimate that AI could result in significant productivity gains, see Martin Neil Baily, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Anton 
Korinek (2023), “Machines of Mind: The Case for an AI-Powered Productivity Boom” (Washington: Brookings Institution, 
May 10), https://www.brookings.edu/articles/machines-of-mind-the-case-for-an-ai-powered-productivity-boom. For an esti-
mate that the productivity effects of AI could be more modest, see Daron Acemoglu (2024), “The Simple Macroeconomics of 
AI,” Economic Policy, eiae042 (August).

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
21

As labor market tightness eased somewhat

Figure 17. Measures of change in hourly 
compensation

further last year, nominal wage growth has

also continued to slow, although to a still-

Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker
Average hourly earnings, private sector
Employment cost index, private sector

cost index (ECI), increased 3.6 percent over

the 12 months ending in December and has

gradually slowed from its peak increase of

also slowed some last year, with the Fed-

eral Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth

Note: For the private-sector employment cost index, 
change is over the 12 months ending in the last 
month of each quarter; for private-sector average 
hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent 
changes; for the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, 
the data are shown as a 3-month moving average of 
the 12-month percent change.

Tracker (which reports the median 12-month

wage growth of individuals responding to the

Current Population Survey) slowing in line with

the ECI and growth in average hourly earnings

the first half but flattening out over the second half.

on how real wage gains have differed across demographic groups, see the box “Employment and

Figure 18. Change in real gross domestic 
product and gross domestic income

Gross domestic product
Gross domestic income

Note: The key identifies bars in order from left 
to right. The data for gross domestic income extend 
through 2024:H1.

Figure 19. Change in real personal 
consumption expenditures

consumer spending adjusted for inflation

above its pace in 2023 (figure 19). Consumer

increased at an average pace of 3.6 percent

ers continued to spend more of their income

than was typical before the pandemic, and

current income and spending, as a share of

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
23

pre-pandemic level for much of the past two

years (figure 20). Consumers maintained this

Figure 21. Indexes of consumer sentiment

Michigan survey (right scale)
Conference Board (left scale)

University of Michigan survey has improved

notably since 2022, it remains well below its

pre-pandemic level. A similar measure from

the Conference Board also remains somewhat

low—though stronger than the University of

Note: The data extend through January 2025.

Senior Loan Officer Opinion Surveys on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), conducted by the Fed-

eral Reserve Board, over the second half of last year banks reported tightening lending standards

further for credit cards but loosening them somewhat for auto loans, albeit from tight levels.9 For

9 These results reported from the SLOOS are based on banks’ responses weighted by each bank’s outstanding loans 
in the respective loan category, and they might therefore differ from the published SLOOS results (which are based on 
banks’ unweighted responses).

Even so, financing has generally remained

households, other than those with low credit

scores, and consumer credit expanded mod-

erately through the third quarter of last year

Residential investment increased 
modestly last year

After steep declines in 2022, residential

Note: Credit card balances were little changed in 
2011 and 2012.

investment turned around in the middle of

2023 and increased modestly, on net, last

through the fall of last year, although to levels

still far above pre-pandemic mortgage rates

(figure 23). More recently, however, mortgage

have evolved differently over the past few

years (figure 24). Existing home sales remain