# Bangladesh Development Update

Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

The World Bank Office, Dhaka 
Plot E-32, Agargaon 
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar 
Dhaka – 1207, Bangladesh 
Tel.: (880-2) 5566-7777 
Fax: (880-2) 5566-7778 
www.worldbank.org/bd

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. The 
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive 
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the 
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do 
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or 
acceptance of such boundaries.

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission 
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, 
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The 
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.

Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................................................3 
Boxes ..........................................................................................................................................................................3 
Tables ..........................................................................................................................................................................3

Abbreviations .........................................................................................................................................................5 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................................6 
Recent Developments ................................................................................................................................................9

Real Sector ..............................................................................................................................................................9

Inflation ........................................................................................................................................................... 12 
Poverty and welfare ........................................................................................................................................ 12 
Monetary and Financial Sector Developments ................................................................................................... 13 
External Sector .................................................................................................................................................... 17 
Fiscal Trends and Debt Sustainability .................................................................................................................. 20 
Outlook, Risks, and Reform Priorities ...................................................................................................................... 23

Near-term outlook, risks, and priorities .............................................................................................................. 23 
Reform priorities ................................................................................................................................................. 25 
Special Focus: Creating Jobs for a Better Future ..................................................................................................... 26

Summary and key messages: .............................................................................................................................. 26 
Section A: Growth and Job Creation ................................................................................................................... 27 
Section B: Educated and Skilled Labor ................................................................................................................ 36 
Section C: Agenda Ahead .................................................................................................................................... 39 
References ............................................................................................................................................................... 42

Box 1: Political Turmoil in July and August and its Immediate Economic Impact ................................................... 10 
Box 2: Revisions to the Balance of Payments .......................................................................................................... 19 
Box 3: Bangladesh Public Finance Review ............................................................................................................... 21

Table 1: Global Growth and Commodity Prices. ..................................................................................................... 10 
Table 2: Growth Rate (Real, percent) ...................................................................................................................... 11 
Table 3: Monetary Program Performance .............................................................................................................. 14 
Table 4: Balance of Payments.................................................................................................................................. 17 
Table 5: Fiscal Outcomes (% of GDP) ....................................................................................................................... 20 
Table 6: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators ......................................................................................................... 24

This report was prepared by a team comprised of Dhruv Sharma (Senior Economist), Nazmus Sadat Khan 
(Economist), Sahar Sajjad Hussain (Senior Economist), Sharmin Akter Jahan (Consultant), Rangeet Ghosh (Senior 
Economist), Souleymane Coulibaly (Program Leader), Zhiyu Jerry Chen (Senior Urban Economist), Gyongshim An 
(Lead Urban Specialist), Yann Bourgeo (Labor Economist), and Bibhuti Chakma (Team Associate). Nethra 
Palaniswamy (Senior Economist) and Sergio Olivieri (Senior Economist) contributed to the analysis of the poverty 
trends and the special focus. Toshiaki Ono (Senior Financial Sector Specialist), Sophie Dong (Financial Sector 
Specialist), and Sadia Afrin (Consultant) contributed to the analysis of the financial sector. Frederico Gil Sander 
(Practice Manager) and Syud Amer Ahmed (Lead Economist) provided guidance on the special focus on jobs. 
Mehrin A. Mahbub (Senior External Affairs Officers) also provided valuable contributions. Hoon Sahib Soh 
(Practice Manager) provided overall guidance under the leadership of Abdoulaye Seck (Country Director, 
Bangladesh and Bhutan) and Mathew Verghis (Regional Director, EFI).

ADB 
Asian Development Bank 
ADP 
Annual Development Programme 
BAFEDA Bangladesh Foreign Exchange Dealers

NBR 
National Board of Revenue 
NDA 
Net Domestic Assets 
NEET 
Not Engaged in Education, Employment, 
or Training 
NFA 
Net Foreign Assets 
NPL 
Non-Performing Loan 
PCA 
Prompt Corrective Action 
PMI 
Purchasing Managers' Index 
PPP 
Purchasing Power Parity 
 
RMG 
Ready-made garments 
SLF 
Standing Lending Facility 
SMART 
Six Month Moving Average Rate of 
Treasury Bills 
SMEs 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
TVET 
Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training 
VAT 
Value-added Tax 
WBES 
World Bank Enterprise Survey

Association 
BB 
Bangladesh Bank 
BBS 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 
BDT 
Bangladeshi Taka 
BoP 
Balance of Payment 
BSCO 
Bangladesh Standard Classification of 
Occupations 
CAD 
Current Account Deficit 
CPD 
Center for Policy Dialogue 
EMDE 
Emerging Market and Developing Economies 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FX 
Foreign Exchange 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GCC 
Gulf Cooperation Council 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
LC 
Letters of Credit 
LDC 
Least Developed Country 
LFS 
Labor Force Survey 
 LLC 
Limited Liability Company 
LMIC 
Lower-Middle Income Countries 
MLT 
Medium and Long-Term 
MPS 
Monetary Policy Statement

An interim government led by Nobel Laureate Dr. Muhammad Yunus was sworn in on August 8, 2024 after former 
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina resigned and left the country amid a student-led mass uprising. The regime change 
came on the back of growing dissatisfaction about a range of issues including a lack of public sector transparency 
and accountability and increasingly limited job opportunities, especially for the youth.

1 Global Economic Prospects (GEP), June 2024. 
2 BB announced major revisions to the estimates of exports and net trade credit figures in the financial account for FY23 
and FY24. However, the net effect of the revisions on the balance of payments was marginal.

government reduced export subsidies, increased administered electricity prices, and in March 2024 adopted a 
market-based pricing formula for liquid fuels which linked domestic prices to international prices.

3 The quota system reserved a significant portion of government jobs for various groups, including freedom fighters' 
descendants, women, ethnic minorities, and people from underprivileged districts. Due to widespread protests and 
demands for reform, the previous government scaled back the quota system in July 2024.

On August 8, 2024, an interim government took office after the resignation of the former Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina following a widespread student-led uprising. The student protests, which began in June 2024, were 
initially aimed at reforming the quota system for government recruits. Following a crackdown and violence that 
led to the deaths of several hundred people, including protesting students, the unrest subsequently evolved into 
a broader call for the resignation of the Prime Minister, which culminated in the Prime Minister’s resignation on 
August 5. The President dissolved Parliament on August 6 and appointed a 15-member interim government on 
August 8. The turmoil caused significant disruptions to economic activities. However, the transition is viewed as 
an opportunity to introduce critical, longstanding reforms to strengthen transparency, accountability, and improve 
public service delivery. There is a certain level of urgency that is driving the delivery of much needed reforms prior 
to holding national elections.

Real GDP growth is estimated to have moderated to 5.2 percent in FY24, declining from 5.8 percent in FY23. On 
the demand side, the slowdown was driven by weak consumption and export growth. On the supply side, the 
growth slowdown was mainly due to the industry sector. Inflation remained elevated, averaging 9.7 percent in 
FY24. Extreme poverty is projected to have increased to 6.1 percent in FY24.

Table 1: Global Growth and Commodity Prices (Real GDP Growth (%)) 
 
2021 
2022 
2023e 
2024f 
2025f 
World 
6.3 
3.0 
2.6 
2.6 
2.7 
Advanced Economies 
5.5 
2.6 
1.5 
1.5 
1.7 
USA 
5.8 
1.9 
2.5 
2.5 
1.8 
Euro Area 
5.9 
3.4 
0.5 
0.7 
1.4 
EMDEs 
7.3 
3.7 
4.2 
4.0 
4.0 
Commodity Prices 
Crude Oil, Brent ($/bbl) 
70.4 
99.8 
82.6 
84.0 
79.0 
Coal, Australia ($/mt) 
138.1 
344.9 
172.8 
125.0 
110.0 
Liquified Natural gas, Japan ($/mmbtu) 
10.8 
18.4 
14.4 
12.5 
13.5 
Fertilizer, TSP ($/mt) 
538 
716 
480 
450 
380 
Cotton ($/kg) 
2.2 
2.8 
2.1 
2.1 
2.2 
Iron ore ($/dmt) 
161.7 
121.3 
120.6 
110.0 
105.0 
Soybean oil ($/mt) 
1385 
1,667 
1,129 
1,130 
1,150 
Source: Global Economic Prospects (June 2024); and Commodity Markets Outlook (April 2024)

Figure 1: Real GDP Growth and Contributions to Real 
GDP Growth

Figure 2: Growth in Real Wages (Low Paid/Unskilled) 
(y-o-y)
Percent

Private Consumption
Government Consumption
Private Investment
Goverment Investment
Exports
Imports
Statistical Discrepancy
GDP growth (real)

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) and WB staff calculations

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) and WB staff calculations

Communication channels with international buyers were completely cut off, affecting ongoing export orders. 
The internet shutdown and bank closures impeded remittance inflows. Although economic activity recovered 
modestly in the last week of July following the relaxation of the curfew and restoration of internet services, the 
situation deteriorated further prior to the Prime Minister’s resignation on August 5, leading to a breakdown in 
law and order due to the absence of police and law enforcement agencies. Economic activity gradually picked 
up after the interim government was established on August 8, 2024. 
 
Inflation spiked in the month of July and moderated in August. Headline inflation rose to 11.7 percent in July 
from 9.7 percent in June. The increase was mainly driven by food inflation which rose to a 13-year high of 14.1 
percent. A breakdown of supply chains due to the curfew and blockades contributed to this spike. Inflation 
moderated to 10.5 percent in August. The Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI)4 dropped sharply from 63.9 in June 
to 36.9 points in July. It improved to 43.5 in August and reached 49.7 points in September, but this still represents 
a deterioration of business confidence. 
 
Remittances declined in July but bounced back in August while FX reserves remained stable. Remittance 
inflows faced severe disruptions during the last two weeks of July due to bank closures and the unavailability of 
internet services. Total remittance inflows for July 2025 were US$1.9 billion, representing a 24.6 percent decline 
from June and a 3.0 percent decline year-on-year (y-o-y). However, remittance inflows bounced back in August, 
increasing by 39.1 percent (y-o-y) driven by exchange rate depreciation, a narrowing of the difference between 
formal and informal exchange rates, and a sharp base effect. As of September 24, 2024, gross foreign exchange 
reserves had declined to US$19.5 billion, down from US$21.7 billion at the end of June. The interbank exchange 
rate remained relatively stable at approximately BDT 120/US$ throughout July and August. As of September 24, 
the informal exchange (“kerb”) rate stabilized around BDT 122/US$. 
 
The popular protests resulted in significant damages to public and private properties. Numerous government 
offices, private properties, and places of historical interest suffered damages. That includes the Metro rail, toll 
counters of the elevated expressway, various government offices, and police stations across the country. The 
full extent of the physical damages remains unknown.

Table 2: Growth Rate (Real, percent) 
 
FY17 
FY18 
FY19 
FY20 
FY21 
FY22 
FY23 
FY24 
GDP Growth 
6.6 
7.3 
7.9 
3.4 
6.9 
7.1 
5.8 
5.2 
 
Growth (%) 
Industry 
8.3 
10.2 
11.6 
3.6 
10.3 
9.9 
8.4 
5.8 
Services 
6.4 
6.6 
6.9 
3.9 
5.7 
6.3 
5.4 
5.3 
Agriculture 
3.2 
3.5 
3.3 
3.4 
3.2 
3.1 
3.4 
3.3 
 
Growth (%) 
Consumption 
6.3 
9.1 
5.5 
2.9 
7.9 
7.4 
2.5 
3.5 
Private consumption 
6.3 
9.4 
4.9 
3.0 
8.0 
7.5 
2.0 
3.9 
 
4 PMI is an index prepared by the Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI) and Policy Exchange 
Bangladesh. It is based on data compiled from monthly surveys of over 500 private sector enterprises. A PMI reading above 
50 generally indicates 'expanding' and below that shows a 'contraction'.

Government consumption 
7.2 
5.3 
13.4 
2.0 
6.9 
6.2 
8.5 
3.5 
Investment 
8.4 
12.1 
6.9 
3.9 
8.1 
11.7 
2.2 
4.8 
Private Investment 
5.7 
14.5 
8.6 
0.2 
7.8 
11.8 
2.9 
5.8 
Government Investment 
17.9 
4.3 
0.7 
18.2 
9.1 
11.1 
-0.0 
1.5 
Resource Balance 
33.1 
76.4 
-18.9 
3.4 
27.0 
34.2 
-38.4 
-40.6 
Exports, goods & services 
-1.8 
6.1 
11.5 
-17.5 
9.2 
29.4 
8.0 
2.7 
Imports, goods & services 
5.2 
23.9 
0.5 
-11.4 
15.3 
31.2 
-9.8 
-2.5 
Statistical discrepancy 
115.6 
31.5 
18.9 
19.4 
7.5 
10.8 
7.1 
5.9 
Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS).

Figure 3: Inflation (Base: 2021-22, y-o-y, %)
Percent

5 World Bank (forthcoming), Paving the Road to Prosperity, Poverty and Equity Assessment.

Table 3: Monetary Program Performance 
 
FY20 
FY21 
FY22 
FY23 
FY 24 
 
Actual 
Actual 
Actual 
Actual 
Actual (p) 
Net Foreign Assets 
10.2 
27.7 
-11.9 
-23.4 
-17.0 
Net Domestic Assets 
13.4 
9.3 
17.2 
21.3 
14.1 
Domestic credit 
13.7 
10.4 
16.2 
15.3 
10.5 
Public Sector credit 
53.4 
21.7 
29.1 
35.8 
12.8 
Private Sector credit 
8.6 
8.3 
13.7 
10.6 
9.8 
Broad Money 
12.7 
13.6 
9.4 
10.5 
8.2 
Reserve Money 
15.7 
22.4 
-0.3 
10.5 
7.9 
Inflation (end of period average) 
5.6 
5.6 
6.1 
9.0 
9.7 
Real GDP Growth 
3.4 
6.9 
7.1 
5.8 
5.8 
Source: Bangladesh Bank and Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. *FY24, provisional GDP growth

Figure 5: Real Interest Rates on Commercial Lending 
and Deposits (weighted average, %)

6 Including Repo facilities, Assured Repo (AR), Assured Liquidity Support (ALS), Liquidity Support against claims of 
Remittance (LSR), and Standing Lending Facilities (SLF) for conventional banks and non-bank financial institutions.

Figure 6: Growth of Broad Money, Net Domestic 
Assets, and Net Foreign Assets (y-o-y)
Percent

Net Foreign Assets
Broad Money
Net Domestic Assets

Private Sector (LHS)
Total Domestic Sector (LHS)
Public Sector (RHS)

BB announced its Agriculture and Rural Credit Policy for the FY25. The overall target is to disburse BDT 380 billion 
which is 8.6 percent higher than last fiscal year’s target. Banks are allowed to disburse loans using their own 
branches, agent banking network, or bank-Macrofinance Institution (MFI) linkages. For recent flood-affected 
districts, BB has announced a special loan repayment facility for installments of August – October 2024 for short-
term agriculture and Cottage, Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise (CMSME) sector term loan borrowers without 
any penalty or additional interest charge.

US$ millions 
 
FY17 
FY18 
FY19 
FY20 
FY21 
FY22 
FY23 
FY24 
Overall Balance 
3,169 
-857 
179 
2,925 
9,274 
-6,656 
-8,222 
-4,300 
Current account balance 
-1,331 
-9,567 
-4,490 
-4,723 
-4,575 
-18,196 
-11,633 
-6,512 
Trade balance 
-9,472 
-18,178 
-15,835 
-17,858 
-23,778 
-33,250 
-27,384 
-22,432 
Merchandise export f.o.b. (inc. EPZ) 
34,019 
36,285 
39,604 
32,832 
36,903 
49,245 
43,364 
40,810 
Merchandise import f.o.b. (inc. EPZ) 
-43,491 
-54,463 
-55,439 
-50,690 
-60,681 
-82,495 
-70,748 
-63,242 
Services 
-3,288 
-4,201 
-3,176 
-2,541 
-3,020 
-3,987 
-3,131 
-3,808 
Income 
-1,870 
-2,641 
-2,382 
-3,106 
-3,172 
-2,726 
-3,407 
-4,817 
Current transfers 
13,299 
15,453 
16,903 
18,782 
25,395 
21,767 
22,289 
24,545 
 Official 
59 
51 
41 
19 
51 
65 
88 
72 
 Private 
13,240 
15,402 
16,862 
18,763 
25,344 
21,702 
22,201 
24,473 
 o/w Workers' remittance 
12,769 
14,982 
16,420 
18,205 
24,778 
21,032 
21,611 
23,912 
Capital account 
400 
331 
239 
256 
458 
610 
475 
554 
Financial account 
4,247 
9,011 
5,130 
7,537 
14,067 
16,691 
6,890 
4,545 
Foreign direct investment (net) 
1,653 
1,778 
2,628 
1,271 
1,355 
1,827 
1,649 
1,697 
Portfolio investment (net) 
457 
349 
171 
44 
-269 
-158 
-30 
-62 
MLT loans (excludes suppliers’ credit) 
3,218 
5,987 
6,263 
6,222 
7,449 
10,295 
8,704 
9,680 
MLT amortization payments 
-895 
-1,113 
-1,202 
-1,257 
-1,417 
-1,527 
-1,745 
-2,021 
Other long-term loans (net) 
-153 
141 
302 
438 
1,684 
1,443 
434 
249 
Other short-term loans (net) 
1,030 
1,508 
272 
931 
2,064 
3,315 
-1,883 
-1,574 
Trade Credit (net) 
-1,185 
-1,270 
-3,493 
-616 
3,749 
311 
2,532 
-1,762 
Change in Commercial Bank Assets (net) 
122 
1,631 
189 
-270 
-548 
1,185 
-2,771 
-1,662 
Errors and omissions 
-147 
-632 
-700 
-145 
-676 
-5,761 
-3,954 
-2,888 
Source: Bangladesh Bank.

7 A floor price was introduced on July 28, 2022 on all share prices to prevent shares from falling beyond a certain level 
which resulted in the share prices of most companies being stuck at their floor prices for an extended period.

Figure 8: Bangladesh - BDT/US$ Exchange Rates

Source: Bangladesh Bank, Staff estimates of kerb market rates

8 Due to the Middle East crisis, cargo ships from Asia were required to take a longer route via South Africa’s Cape of Good 
Hope to reach their destinations in Europe and the Americas, causing significant increases in costs and delivery time. 
9 In November 2023, the Bangladesh Foreign Exchange Dealers' Association (BAFEDA) allowed banks to purchase remittance 
inflows above the formal cap by providing additional incentive payments, and BB allowed deviations from the remittance 
exchange rate cap through verbal instructions to individual banks. 
10 BB also bought US$3.4 billion, resulting in net sales of US$9.4 billion.

Box 2: Revisions to the Balance of Payments

Figure 9: Merchandise Exports and Current Account 
Balance in FY24
US$ Billions

BB recently revised the BoP – specifically, exports 
and the financial account – for FY23 and FY24 
which lowered the estimates of the BoP deficit. 
The revised data indicated that merchandise 
exports were significantly lower than the 
estimates published earlier. The revised data from 
the BB indicate that exports, during the first 3 
quarters (July-March) of FY24 totaled US$30.9 
billion, which is US$9.9 billion lower than 
previously reported. As a result, the current 
account, previously thought to be in a surplus of 
US$5.8 billion for the July-March period of FY24, 
turned into a deficit of US$4.1 billion. The revised 
data for FY23 indicated that merchandise exports were US$6.9 billion lower than earlier estimates. This resulted 
in a downward revision of the current account balance by US$6.5 billion.

The financial account was also revised. Prior to 
the revisions, the financial account was in a 
significant deficit of US$9.3 billion for the July-
March period of FY24, mainly due to a deficit in net 
trade credit. However, due to the revisions, the 
financial account moved to a surplus of US$0.7 
billion for the same period. The net trade credit 
deficit of US$12.2 billion was revised to a smaller 
deficit of US$2.2 billion. The revisions to net trade 
credit centered on reconciling the difference 
between exports receipts and shipments, which 
previously contributed to a net credit outflow. The 
adjustment in the financial account effectively 
offsets the changes in the current account. As a 
result, the overall impact of data revisions on the BoP was small. The revised data for FY23 indicate the net 
credit inflow was US$6.9 billion more than previously recorded for the July-April period. However, similar to 
FY24, the downward revision of the current account was offset by the upward revision of the financial account, 
resulting in an unchanged BoP deficit of US$8.8 billion for FY23. 
 
Concerns about the veracity of exports data have been growing over the past years. Earlier data showing 
robust exports growth was not reconcilable with data available from a variety of sources. Exporters and 
business leaders had expressed doubts over official exports figures, citing their declining export orders and 
difficulties due to rising input costs, energy shortages, and supply chain disruptions caused by the Middle East

Figure 10: Financial Account, Net Trade Credit, and 
Balance of Payments in FY24
US$ Billions

Financial Account
Net Trade Credit
Balance of Payments

The fiscal deficit was estimated at 4.5 percent of GDP in FY24, similar to the 4.6 percent deficit in FY23. Revenue 
and expenditure as a percent of GDP also remained at similar levels to the previous year. Bangladesh's revenue-
to-GDP ratio remains among the lowest globally. The stock of public debt increased modestly to 38.8 percent of 
GDP.

Figure 11: Budget Estimate vs. Actual Total Revenue 
Collection

Budget Estimate of Revenue
Actual Revenue

Table 5: Fiscal Outcomes (% of GDP) 
 
FY19 
FY20 
FY21 
FY22 
FY23 
FY24e 
FY25f 
Total revenue 1/ 
8.6 
8.5 
9.4 
8.5 
8.2 
8.5 
8.3 
Tax revenue 
7.7 
7.0 
7.6 
7.5 
7.3 
7.4 
7.3 
Total expenditure 
13.3 
13.3 
13.0 
13.0 
12.8 
13.0 
12.6 
Current expenditure 
7.4 
7.4 
7.5 
7.7 
8.0 
8.3 
8.3 
Capital expenditures 
5.2 
5.1 
4.7 
4.6 
4.3 
4.2 
3.8 
Deficit 1/ 
-4.7 
-4.8 
-3.7 
-4.6 
-4.6 
-4.5 
-4.3 
Net external financing 
1.1 
1.3 
1.3 
1.6 
1.8 
1.9 
2.0 
Net domestic financing 
3.6 
3.4 
2.3 
2.9 
2.8 
2.6 
2.3 
General government debt stock 
28.5 
31.7 
32.4 
33.8 
37.0 
38.8 
40.6 
External 
10.4 
11.8 
11.9 
12.5 
15.0 
16.1 
17.4 
Domestic 
18.1 
19.9 
20.5 
21.3 
22.0 
22.7 
23.1 
Source: Ministry of Finance. World Bank MFMoD forecast for FY25 
1/Excluding grants, e=estimated, f=forecast 
Note: FY24 estimated result based on data available as of 20th September 2024.

The stock of public debt grew modestly. Public debt (excluding guarantees) is estimated to have increased to 38.8 
percent of GDP in FY24, from 37 percent in FY23. Domestic debt accounts for 56 percent of total public debt. 
External debt amounted to around 16.1 percent of GDP. Most of the external debt is long-term and is owed to 
multilateral creditors (58 percent of total external debt). The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank are 
the major multilateral creditors accounting for 90 percent of multilateral credit. Japan, China, and Russia are the 
major bilateral creditors. About 37 percent of the external debt is denominated in US dollars, followed by Special 
Drawing Rights (36 percent) and Japanese Yen (18 percent) (Ministry of Finance, 2024). The June 2024 joint World 
Bank-IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) assessed Bangladesh to be at low risk of debt distress.

Figure 12: Total Expenditure – Variation between budget and 
actual expenditure (Percent of GDP)

0.4% 0.9% 1.2% 2.1% 2.5% 2.7% 3.1% 3.0% 2.5% 3.2% 3.1% 2.2% 2.3%

Table 6: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators (annual percentage change, unless indicated otherwise) 
 
FY21 
FY22 
FY23 
FY24e 
FY25f 
FY26f 
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 
6.9 
7.1 
5.8 
5.2 
4.0 
5.5 
Private Consumption 
8.0 
7.5 
2.0 
3.9 
3.8 
4.8 
Government Consumption 
6.9 
6.2 
8.5 
3.5 
3.5 
9.2 
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 
8.1 
11.7 
2.2 
4.8 
3.1 
6.4 
Exports, Goods, and Services 
9.2 
29.4 
8.0 
2.7 
2.1 
4.5 
Imports, Goods, and Services 
15.3 
31.2 
-9.8 
-2.5 
0.4 
5.1 
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 
7.0 
7.2 
6.2 
5.3 
4.0 
5.5 
Agriculture 
3.2 
3.1 
3.4 
3.3 
3.0 
3.1 
Industry 
10.3 
9.9 
8.4 
5.8 
3.3 
5.4 
Services 
5.7 
6.3 
5.4 
5.3 
4.7 
6.0 
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 
5.6 
6.1 
9.0 
9.7 
9.0 
7.5 
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 
-1.1 
-4.2 
-2.8 
-1.4 
-0.9 
-0.5 
Financial Account Balance (% of GDP) 
3.4 
3.9 
1.7 
1.0 
1.0 
1.1 
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) 1/ 
-3.7 
-4.6 
-4.6 
-4.5 
-4.3 
-4.6 
Primary Balance (% of GDP) 1/ 
-1.7 
-2.6 
-2.5 
-1.9 
-1.4 
-1.6 
Debt (% of GDP) 
32.4 
33.8 
37.0 
38.8 
40.6 
41.8 
Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics; Ministry of Finance; Staff Estimates. 1/ including grants

11 The Business Ready (B-READY) 2024 report is the World Bank's new flagship report and it assesses the regulatory framework 
and public services directed at firms, and the efficiency with which regulatory framework and public services are combined 
in practice.

Between 2016 and 2022, the manufacturing sector grew annually by 9.1 percent on average, but jobs in this sector 
declined by 9.6 percent. Most new jobs were created in the agriculture sector, where a significant portion are low-
paying informal employment. Between 2016 and 2022, the employment in urban areas grew by only 0.7 million. 
Slow growth in urban employment was accompanied by declining labor participation across all divisions and 
declining employment for urban women. Gender disparity in the labor market remains significant. Between 2016-
2022, real wages in all sectors have declined.

12 The analysis in this report is largely based on the Bangladesh Labor Force Survey (2022), the World Bank Enterprise Surveys 
(2022) and the Jobs Group Global Macro Indicators Database. It also draws from several World Bank reports, including Poverty 
and Equity Assessment (forthcoming), Galal. R. et.al, (forthcoming). 
13 Frontier firms are the most productive- 10 percent of all firms and are identified using the World Bank Enterprise Surveys 
(2013 and 2022) and the Survey of Manufacturing Industries (SMI, 2019). 
14 The Business Ready (B-READY) 2024 report is the World Bank's new flagship report designed to help countries establish a 
conducive business climate for progress on key development goals.

In recent years, jobs growth has been nearly sufficient to absorb working age population growth. From 2016 to 
2022, an additional 9.7 million jobs were created, and the total number of employed people rose by 30.2 percent 
to 70.5 million. The gap between employment growth and working age population growth essentially closed from 
2010-16 to 2016-2022, due to the declining population growth (Figure 13B). Since 2010, the labor force participation 
rate remained relatively steady between 57 to 59 percent before modestly increasing to 61.2 percent in 2022. The 
unemployment rate declined from 4.2 percent in 2016 to 3.5 percent in 2022, driven by a 3.1 percentage point 
decline in female unemployment. However, the improvements in aggregate job creation concealed several 
underlying structural challenges in the labor market.

Figure 13: Employment, Labor Force, and Working Age Population Growth 
A. Employment growth has outpaced growth in the working-
age population and labor force in recent years…

B…the average annual expansion of 1.5 million jobs since 
2016 has been nearly sufficient to absorb population growth

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on Labor Force Survey (LFS) 2010, 2016, and 2022.

The agriculture sector has been driving the growth of jobs. The share of jobs in industry and services sectors in 
total employment have declined.

Bangladesh lags behind other South Asian and Lower-Middle Income Countries (LMICs) in terms of progress in 
jobs creation in the industry and service sectors (Figure 15). This contrasts with the typical trend seen in other 
rapidly growing developing countries, where employment in industry and services increases as income rises. 
Bangladesh’s share of employment in the industry sector is not only lower than its fellow LMICs and other South 
Asian countries, it is also lower than the average of low-income countries. For services, the ratio is higher than the 
low-income group countries, but still lower than the LMIC and South Asian country average.

Figure 15: Sectoral share in total employment (%)

Figure 14: Sectoral share in GDP and employment

Agriculture
Industry
Services
Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS)

Source: World Development Indicators (WDI) and BBS

15 This report analyzes labor market developments using the Labor Force Surveys of 2010, 2016, and 2022. Therefore, it 
compares labor market development pre- and post-2016.

Figure 16: Diminished employment in urban areas was accompanied by a decrease in labor force

participation 
A. Contrasting trends across divisions offset each other, 
resulting in negligible job creation in urban areas…

B.…accompanied by a decrease in labor force 
participation across space and the consumption 
distribution

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on LFS 2010, 2016, and 2022.

16 Based on the Bangladesh Standard Classification of Occupations 2020 (BSCO-2020), elementary occupation includes 
cleaners and helpers, laborers in different sectors, food preparation assistance, street and related sales and service 
workers, and refuse workers, among others.

The majority of jobs are in the informal sector17

Figure 18: Share of employed population by

Figure 17: Informal employment as a share of total

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Labor Force Survey (2022)

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Labor Force Survey (2022)

Figure 19. Share in total employment and wages

Source: Bangladesh Standard Classification of Occupations

The share of wage employment has declined marginally. Currently, wage employment accounts for 
approximately 38.1 percent of total employment in Bangladesh, a decrease of 1 percentage point since 2016. In

17 Informal sector enterprises are private unincorporated enterprises (excluding quasi-corporations), i.e. enterprises owned 
by individuals or households that are not constituted as separate legal entities independently of their owners, and for which 
no complete accounts are available that would permit a financial separation of the production activities of the enterprise 
from the other activities of its owner(s). 
18 Informal jobs are carried out in formal sector enterprises, informal sector enterprises, or households (paid domestic 
workers, goods production for own consumption), during a given reference period. Notably, informal employment refers to 
those jobs that generally lack basic social or legal protection or employment benefits.

contrast, own-account workers and contributing family workers make up 57.4 percent of total employment, with 
a significant share of women in rural areas.19 This is contrary to the broader trend observed in many developing 
countries where economic growth typically leads to a transition from self-employment and unpaid family work to 
wage employment, particularly in formal sectors. Generally, this increase in wage employment is accompanied by 
a reduction in agricultural employment and a slight decrease in unpaid work and off-farm self-employment (World 
Bank, 2018).

19 Own account workers are defined as persons, who hold self-employment jobs and do not engage ‘employees’ on a 
continuous basis. 
20 The structural peers consisted of Cambodia, India, and Vietnam. 
21 Galal, R. et al. (2024)

Figure 21. Share of one-person operated informal

Figure 22. Percentage of businesses across sectors

Percent of businesses with only one person

Making goods
Retail (re-selling)
Other services

Source: World Bank Informal Enterprise Survey (2022)

Source: World Bank Informal Enterprise Survey (2022)

22 Based on the World Bank Informal Enterprise survey for Bangladesh 2022. 
23 According to the 2013 Economic Census 98 percent of economic units are microenterprises. 
24 The surveys are not nationally representative but are designed to be geographically representative of selected urban 
areas (Dhaka MA, Chittagong MA, and the Cox’s Bazar District) and cover all unregistered businesses.

25 Frontier firms are the most productive 10 percent of all firms and are identified using the World Bank Enterprise Surveys 
(2013 and 2022) and the Survey of Manufacturing Industries (SMI, 2019).

Figure 24: Job creation within manufacturing by firm

Source: Bangladesh SMI Manufacturing Survey (2019)
Note: Total number of manufacturing employees by age-group

Figure 25: Percent of firms with foreign ownership

Figure 26: Percent of firms that introduced a new

Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys 2022

Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys 2022

26 Total sales of all firms in the formal sector with more than 5 employees (World Bank Enterprise Surveys, 2022) 
27 Galal et al (2024)

Figure 27: Firm's regulatory experiences

Senior management time spent
dealing with the requirements of

Bangladesh
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Philippines
VietNam

Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey 2022.
Note: Only peer countries with data available are listed

Figure 28: Top three business environment constraints by size

Electricity Corruption
Customs 
and trade 
regulations

Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey 2022

Unemployment among university-educated youth has increased significantly

Younger and more educated cohorts, especially 
females, face high unemployment rates. Despite a 
decline in the country’s unemployment rate between 
2016 and 2022, almost one-fifth of young women have 
remained unemployed, and the unemployment rate for 
young men has increased by 2.5 percentage points to 
reach 13 percent in 2022. The gap between male and 
female labor force participation rate declines with 
higher level of education (from 50.7 percentage points 
for no education to 27.7 percentage points for higher 
secondary), but it rises after tertiary education (30.1 
percentage points), indicating greater difficulties for 
women to find appropriate jobs after completing higher education. Discrimination in pay, upward mobility, and 
hiring practices inhibit female employment. For example, women comprise 80 percent of production line workers 
in the RMG industry but only 5 percent of production line supervisors (World Bank, 2019b). There are no 
protections in Bangladeshi law against gender discrimination in hiring, pay, or provision of credit.

Figure 29: Tertiary educated unemployed as a % of

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Labor Force Survey 2022

Figure 30: Investing in higher education does not guarantee finding a job in urban areas 
A. The scarcity of job opportunities in urban areas 
disproportionately affects young, educated women…

Source: World Bank. Forthcoming. Paving the road to prosperity in Bangladesh. Poverty and Equity Assessment.

Figure 31: Percent share of youth (15-29) reporting

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Labor Force Survey 2022

Figure 32: Labor underutilization rate (%) based on

Unemployment
Time related unemployment
Potential Labor Force

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Labor Force Survey 2022

28 Time-related underemployment (working less than 40 hours in a week) is when total working hours is less than the total 
hours a person is willing and available to work.

29 World Bank ‘Jobs for Development’ report (forthcoming)

Asian Development Bank (2010). “Country Gender Assessment: Bangladesh”. ADB, Manila, Philippines.

Andaleeb, S. S., S. Mahmud, F. S. Rahman, and K. Chowdhury (2018). “Roads Free from Sexual Harassment and 
Crash for Women”. BRAC University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Asian Development Bank and International Labor Organization (2016). “Bangladesh: Looking Beyond Garments”. 
Manila, Philippines: ADB.

Chowdhury, F. (2020). “Skills Gap of Business Graduates in the Banking Sector of Bangladesh: Employers’ 
Expectation Versus Reality”. International Education Studies. Vol. 13 (12). Pp 48-57.

Center for Policy Dialogue (2024). “Gen Z’s Employment Expectations: An Explanatory Study in Bangladesh”.

“Datta, Namita; Rong, Chen; Singh, Sunamika; Stinshoff, Clara; Iacob, Nadina; Nigatu, Natnael 
Simachew; Nxumalo, Mpumelelo; Klimaviciute, Luka. 2023. Working Without Borders: The Promise and Peril of 
Online Gig Work. © Washington, DC: World Bank.

Farole, T., Cho, Y., Bossavie, L. and Aterido, L. (2017). “Bangladesh Jobs Diagnostic.” World Bank, Washington, 
DC. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO.

Galal, R.., Schiffbauer, M., Rossignol, M., and Dexter, G. (forthcoming). “Frontier Firms and Job Creation in 
Bangladesh”. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
 
Livani, T., and J. Solotaroff. 2019. “Promoting Women’s Participation in Cross-border Trade in South Asia.” Indian 
Journal of Women and Social Change 4 (1): 9–32.

International Finance Corporation. 2021. “Creating Markets in Bangladesh: Unleashing the Private Sector to 
Sustain Development Success”. Country Private Sector Diagnostic. Washington, DC: International Finance 
Corporation.

Milon, M., Islam, M., and Khan, A.R. (2021). “Employability Skills of Business Graduates in Job Markets of 
Bangladesh: Investigating Weaknesses and Suggesting Improvements”. International Journal of Management 
and Accounting. 3(1). Page 20-27

Rahman, M., Farooq, M.O, Selim, M. (2021). “Mitigating educated youth unemployment in Bangladesh”. The 
Journal of Developing Areas. Volume 55 (1).

World Bank (2018a). “Pathways to Better Jobs in IDA Countries:”. Dino Merotto, Michael Weber, and Reyes 
Aterido. Job Series. Issue no. 18. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank (2018b). “South Asia Economic Focus Spring 2018: Jobless Growth?” World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank (2019a). “Bangladesh Development Update: Tertiary Education and Job Skills.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

World Bank (2019b). “Female Labor Force Participation in Bangladesh: What Do We Know? How Can We 
Address It in Operations?” World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank (2019). “Women, Business and the Law 2019: A Decade of Reform”. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2021). “Gearing Up for the Future of Manufacturing in Bangladesh”. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2022). Bangladesh Country Economic Memorandum: Change of Fabric. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.