# ecb financial stability review 2025 11

1 
Macro-financial and credit environment 
15

Box 2 The role of household investors in market downturns 
44

Box 3 US dollar activities of European banks: business models and

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Contents

Box 4 Procyclicality and leverage of euro area UCITS hedge funds: an

What safe haven after the April US tariff announcement? 
Implications for euro area financial stability 
94

Systemic risks in linkages between banks and the non-bank 
financial sector 
109

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Contents

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

Chart 3 
Higher issuance and funding costs could strain weak sovereigns, with fiscal slippage 
or external fiscal stress potentially leading to renewed sovereign fragmentation

a) Sovereign credit ratings 
and spreads vs German Bund

b) Yield curves in the euro 
area, United States and United 
Kingdom

c) Government indebtedness 
and projected average fiscal 
balance over 2025-26

(20 Nov. 2024-18 Nov. 2025, basis points) 
(percentages, years to maturity) 
(2024, 2025-26; percentages)

Sources: LSEG, Fitch Ratings, Moody’s Analytics, S&P Global Market Intelligence, Bloomberg Finance L.P., European Commission and 
ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the chart shows only euro area countries with revised ratings since November 2024. Average rating of the long-term 
issuer ratings assigned by Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch Ratings. The latest observations are for 18 November 2025. Panel b: 
yields reflect monthly averages. November 2025 figures based on data up to 18 November. Panel c: projected headline fiscal balance is 
calculated by taking the average of 2025 and 2026. The horizontal red line marks the 3% of GDP budget deficit threshold set in the 
Maastricht Treaty. The vertical red line marks the threshold of 100% of GDP for sovereign debt and is based on findings in the empirical 
literature. The green (red) dots indicate projected real GDP growth rates for 2026 above (below) the euro area average. EA stands for 
euro area.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

Chart 4 
Corporate vulnerabilities remain elevated as the effects of tariffs take hold, potentially 
weakening household resilience if layoffs affect their debt servicing capacity

a) Share in euro area employment, gross value 
added and credit, by sector and tariff 
sensitivity

b) Misery index and household indebtedness 
in the euro area

(Q2 2025, percentages) 
(Jan. 2001-Sep. 2025, percentages)

Sources: Eurostat and ECB (ICP, MNA, QSA), Eurostat (LFSI), ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: bubble size represents the share of total loans. Panel b: the misery index is an economic indicator that measures 
economic hardship by adding the unemployment rate to the inflation rate. HICP stands for the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
measure of inflation.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

Chart 5 
Euro area banks’ resilience supports rising valuations, but credit risk exposures to 
tariff-sensitive firms and stronger funding ties with non-banks could pose a challenge

a) Euro area bank stock 
prices, dividend futures and 
profit expectations

b) Cost of risk of listed euro 
area banks and euro area 
manufacturing PMI

c) Euro area banks’ funding 
from non-banks, by 
instrument

(1 Jan. 2024-18 Nov. 2025; 
index:1 January 2024 = 100, percentages)

(Q1 2010-Q3 2025; diffusion index, 
percentages)

(2021, 2023, H1 2025; € trillions, 
percentages)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., S&P Global Market Intelligence, CEPR and Haver Analytics, ECB (supervisory data) and ECB 
calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: ROE stands for return on equity. Panel b: “Cost of risk” is defined as impairments on loans divided by loans. PMI stands 
for Purchasing Managers’ Index. The grey bars indicate recession periods, as determined by the CEPR Euro Area Business Cycle 
Dating Committee. Panel c: non-banks comprise insurance corporations, pension funds, investment funds, money market funds and 
other financial institutions. Deposits and repos from non-banks are obtained from ECB supervisory data and are collected at the 
consolidated level. For data on bonds from non-banks obtained from the SHS dataset, all bonds issue by euro area significant institutions 
are aggregated at the consolidated level.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

1 
Macro-financial and credit environment

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.1 
Global uncertainties and tariff rates weigh on euro area growth, while inflation 
continues to moderate

a) US effective tariff rate and 
global trade policy uncertainty

b) Euro area year-on-year real 
GDP growth

c) Euro area headline and core 
inflation

(1 Jan.-17 Nov. 2025, left-hand scale: 
percentages, right-hand scale: index)

(Q1 2022-Q3 2025, percentages) 
(Jan. 2021-Oct. 2025, percentages)

Sources: The Budget Lab at Yale, Caldara et al.*, Eurostat, ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the effective tariff rate for 2025 is measured pre-substitution (i.e. assuming there are no shifts in the import shares of 
different countries compared with 2024). The trade policy uncertainty index is as presented in Caldara et al.* Panel b: the chart shows 
average annualised year-on-year GDP growth rates and average contributions from different components. Panel c: headline inflation is 
measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), while core inflation is defined as the HICP excluding energy and food. 
*) Caldara, D., Iacoviello, M., Molligo, P., Prestipino, A. and Raffo, A., “The economic effects of trade policy uncertainty”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, Vol. 109, 2020, pp. 38-59.

1 See Section 3 entitled “Prices and Costs”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, ECB, 2025.

2 Average index value in 2015-24 is 86.5.

3 See, for example, Allayioti, A. et al., “More uncertainty, less lending: how US policy affects firm financing 
in Europe”, The ECB Blog, ECB, 2025.

Chart 1.4 
Euro area debt sustainability faces challenges from rising interest costs and a 
potential reassessment of risk by investors

a) Distribution of ten-year 
sovereign spreads versus 
Germany across the euro area

b) Difference between 30-year 
and two-year sovereign bond 
yields

c) Debt issuance volumes and 
yield at issuance

(basis points) 
(1 Jan.-18 Nov. 2025, basis points) 
(Jan. 2013-Sep. 2025; € trillions, 
percentages)

Sources: ECB and Eurostat (GFS), LSEG, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Note: Panel a: spreads are shown as monthly averages. The latest observations are for 18 November 2025. Panel c: the chart shows 
12-month moving sums for debt issuance and 12-month moving averages for the yield at issuance.

10 The results of analyses of the impact of defence spending on growth are subject to uncertainty. For 
details, see the article entitled “Macroeconomic impacts of higher defence spending: a model-based 
assessment”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, ECB, September 2025.

11 The national escape clause was activated for 11 euro area countries: Belgium, Germany, Estonia, 
Greece, Croatia, Latvia, Lithuania, Portugal, Slovenia, Slovakia and Finland. See “Council activates 
flexibility in EU fiscal rules for 15 member states to increase defence spending”, press release, Council of 
the EU, 8 July 2025, and “Economic governance: Council approves Germany’s fiscal expenditure path 
and its flexibility to increase defence spending”, press release, Council of the EU, 10 October 2025.

12 See “Communication to the College on the notification to requesting Member States of the allocation of 
the loan amounts pursuant to Council Regulation 2025/1106”, European Commission, 9 September 
2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Euro area corporations still appear reluctant to expand their borrowing, even 
though financing costs are more favourable than they were six months ago. 
According to the latest survey data, firms continue to report a decline in bank lending 
rates. However, both large firms and small and medium-sized enterprises have 
indicated a further slight net tightening of other loan conditions, relating to both other

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.5 
The euro area corporate sector faces uncertain prospects amid elevated debt service 
costs and bankruptcies

b) Debt service ratio and bank 
lending rates

c) Corporate bankruptcies and 
new car registrations

(Jan. 2022-Sep. 2025, € billions) 
(Jan. 2022-Sep. 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2022-Q3 2025, left-hand scale: index: 
Q4 2019 = 100, right-hand scale: 
percentages)

Sources: Eurostat, ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: adjusted loans to euro area non-financial corporations (NFCs) reported by monetary financial institutions in the euro area 
(transactions). Panel b: the debt service ratio is the sum of the interest paid in the current and the past three quarters divided by the sum 
of net operating surplus and property income in the current and the past three quarters for the NFC sector. Bank interest rates are for 
loans to corporations (new business) in the euro area. Panel c: the grey area shows the minimum-maximum range of index values across 
the following sectors: construction, trade, transport, accommodation and food services, information and communication, finance and real 
estate and professional services, industry excluding construction, education and health care. New passenger car and commercial 
vehicle registrations are for the euro area 20 (fixed composition).

13 See the ECB’s “Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area” covering the third 
quarter of 2025.

14 See the ECB’s “Euro area bank lending survey” covering the third quarter of 2025.

15 At current margins, total new loan volumes are 7% lower than the average for the period 2022-25 and a 
full 28% lower than the average for the period 2019-25.

16 In addition, the availability of skilled labour and production, as well as labour costs, remains a major 
concern limiting production. Firms also highlighted finding customers (53%) and competition (45%) as 
major concerns. This indicates that trade policy uncertainty was affecting their business decisions (see 
the ECB’s “Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area” covering the third quarter of 
2025).

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

17 See the box entitled “Impact of trade tensions and US tariffs on euro area firms” in the ECB’s Survey on 
the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area covering the second quarter of 2025.

18 See Section 1.3 of the Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2025, and Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, ECB, 
2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.6 
Vulnerabilities in the euro area corporate sector remain elevated, especially for 
manufacturing firms, as the broader impact of US tariffs is felt

c) Distribution of Altman 
Z-scores in euro area sectors

(Jan. 2019-Oct. 2025, percentage balances) (Q1 2019-Q4 2028E, Z-scores) 
(Q1 2019-Q4 2025, Z-scores)

Sources: ECB (BSI, MIR), S&P Global Market Intelligence, Eurostat and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: order book levels in the euro area 20 (fixed composition). Panel b: for details on the construction of the corporate 
vulnerability index, see the box entitled “Assessing corporate vulnerabilities in the euro area”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November 
2020. Positive values indicate higher vulnerability while negative values indicate lower vulnerability. The grey shaded area refers to the 
forecast. Panel c: the Altman Z-score calculation is sector specific, according to Altman*, ** and Altman, Hartzell and Peck***. A higher 
Altman Z-score corresponds to a healthier balance sheet structure. Other real sectors include firms in agriculture, arts and recreation, 
construction, information and communication, other industry, professional services, real estate, and wholesale and retail trade. 
*) See Altman E.I., “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 23, 
September 1968, pp. 589-609. 
**) Altman, E.I., “Corporate Financial Distress: A Complete Guide to Predicting, Avoiding, and Dealing With Bankruptcy”, Wiley 
Interscience, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, 1983. 
***) Altman, E.I., Hartzell, J. and Peck, M., “Emerging market corporate bonds — a scoring system”, in Levich, R.M. (ed.), Emerging 
Market Capital Flows, Vol. 2, The New York University Salomon Center Series on Financial Markets and Institutions, Springer, Boston, 
MA, 1998.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Box 1 
 
From localised shocks to systemic risks: the hidden threat of rolling recessions

Prepared by Peter Bednarek, Sándor Gardó, Ana Goulão Diogo Bandeira and Benjamin Klaus

21 For more information on debt servicing capacity, see Brunnermeier, M., Correia, S., Luck, S., Verner, E. 
and Zimmermann, T., “The Debt-Inflation Channel of the German (Hyper) Inflation”, American Economic 
Review, Vol. 115, No 7, July 2025, pp. 2111-2150.

22 For more information on profit margins, see the article entitled “How have unit profits contributed to the 
recent strengthening of euro area domestic price pressures?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2023.

23 The concept of rolling recessions has gained popularity recently; see, for example, “What is a rolling 
recession? And are we in one right now?”, World Economic Forum, March 2023. It was, however, already 
discussed in the late 1990s; see, for example, “Rolling Recessions”, Southwest Economy, Issue 5, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 1997. The term was first coined by analysts in the 1980s to describe the 
evolution of regional business cycles in the United States. Later it was also used for sectoral business 
cycles, as regional and sectoral business cycles in the United States often move together.

24 See, for example, Caballero, R.J. and Engel, E.M.R.A., “Microeconomic rigidities and aggregate price 
dynamics”, European Economic Review, Vol. 37, No 4, May 1993, pp. 697-717.

25 See, for example, Görtz, C., Gunn, C. and Lubik, T.A., “The Changing Nature of Technology Shocks”, 
Working Paper Series, No 24-13, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, September 2024; and Kim, H.S., 
Matthes, C. and Phan, T., “Severe Weather and the Macroeconomy”, American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics, Vol. 17, No 2, April 2025, pp. 315-341.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart A 
Rolling recessions create staggered, sector-specific vulnerabilities masked by aggregate indicators

a) Declarations of bankruptcy and 
corporate NPL ratio in the euro 
area

b) Time-varying vulnerability, by 
sector of economic activity

c) Vulnerability dimensions across 
economic sectors

(Q1 2015-Q2 2025, left-hand scale: index: 
2021 = 100, right-hand scale: percentages) 
(Q2 1996-Q2 2025, composite indicator) 
(Q2 1996-Q2 2025, x-axis: percentages, left-hand 
scale: absolute numbers, right-hand scale: bubble 
size; share in GVA in Q2 2025)

Sources: Eurostat and ECB (QSA), ECB (supervisory data), CEPR and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the chart shows Eurostat’s index of bankruptcy declarations, which is a weighted average of national indices, based on the absolute number of 
bankruptcies. The voluntary data collection before 2021 and national differences in bankruptcy laws imply a need for caution in interpreting the data. Panel b: the 
sectoral vulnerability measure captures three dimensions based on gross value added (GVA): (i) volatility of year-on-year GVA growth; (ii) downturn frequency; 
and (iii) tail risk, defined as the 5% value-at-risk (VaR) of year-on-year GVA growth. It is calculated over a 20-quarter rolling window using a pooled sample from 
all euro area countries at a quarterly frequency. The grey areas indicate crisis periods, as determined by the CEPR Euro Area Business Cycle Dating Committee. 
Panel c: volatility, downturn frequency and tail risk are calculated for the period from Q1 1996 to Q2 2025 using a pooled sample from all euro area countries at 
a quarterly frequency. The colour of the bubbles indicates the tail risk, defined as the 5% VaR of year-on-year GVA growth.

26 For more information on the declining importance of energy price shocks, see, for example, Edelstein, P. 
and Kilan, L., “How sensitive are consumer expenditures to retail energy prices?”, Journal of Monetary 
Economics, Vol. 56, Issue 6, 2009, pp. 766-779; and on monetary policy shocks, see, for example, 
Boivin, J. and Giannoni, M.P., “Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?”, The Review of Economics 
and Statistics, Vol. 88, Issue 3, 2006, pp. 445-462.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart B 
Rolling recessions can unexpectedly align across sectors, increasing the likelihood of tail-risk events

a) Rolling correlations between growth rates of 
sectoral GVA in the euro area

b) Share of sectors with negative GVA and lending 
growth

(Q4 1997-Q2 2025, correlation coefficients) 
(Q1 1997-Q2 2025, percentages)

Sources: Eurostat and ECB (QSA), CEPR and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the chart shows the distribution of rolling correlations (based on an eight-quarter rolling window) between gross value added (GVA) year-on-year 
growth rates for all sector pairs across euro area countries over time. The grey areas indicate crisis periods, as determined by the CEPR Euro Area Business 
Cycle Dating Committee. Panel b: the chart compares two measures of economic stress: (i) the GVA stress indicator, which shows the percentage of 
non-financial sectors with negative year-on-year GVA growth; and (ii) the credit stress indicator (only available from 2002), which reflects the share of sectors 
experiencing negative lending growth at each point in time. EA stands for euro area.

28 See Paravisini, D., Rappoport, V. and Schnabl, P., “Specialization in Bank Lending: Evidence from 
Exporting Firms”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 78, No 4, August 2023, pp. 2049-2085.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart C 
Rolling recessions can fuel sectoral credit risk clustering, with correlated NPL dynamics amplifying 
systemic vulnerabilities

a) Euro area sectoral NPL correlation 
b) Country-sector pairs with rising NPL ratios

(Q1 2014-Q2 2025, correlation coefficients) 
(Q1 2016-Q2 2025, absolute numbers)

Sources: ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: “Prof. services” stands for professional services; “Pub. admin.” stands for public administration. The chart depicts correlations, averaged across 
all countries, between country-specific sector pairs using contemporaneous data. Sample consist of 18 euro area countries. Panel b: the chart shows the number 
of country-sector pairs with rising NPL ratios.

1.4 
Elevated savings bolster household resilience

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.7 
The overall financial situation of households remains strong as they continue to 
deleverage

a) Composite indicator of household 
vulnerabilities

b) Household indebtedness and interest debt 
service

(Q1 2000-Q2 2025, standard deviations from long-run average) 
(Q1 2003-Q2 2025, percentages)

Sources: Eurostat, ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the composite indicator is based on a broad set of indicators along five dimensions: (i) debt servicing capacity (measured 
by gross interest payments/income ratio, saving ratio and expectation of personal financial situation); (ii) leverage (gross debt/income 
and gross debt/total assets ratios); (iii) financing (bank lending rate, short-term debt/long-term debt ratio, quick ratio (defined as current 
financial assets/current liabilities) and credit impulse (defined as the change in new credit issued as a share of GDP)); (iv) income (real 
income growth and income/GDP ratio); and (v) activity (labour participation rate and unemployment expectations). The indicators are 
standardised by transforming them into z-scores, meaning that they are converted into a common scale with a mean of zero and a 
standard deviation of one. Composite sub-indicators are calculated for each of the five dimensions by taking the simple arithmetic mean 
of the respective underlying z-scores of the individual indicators. Finally, the overall composite indicator is obtained by equally weighting 
the composite z-scores of the five sub-categories. Positive values indicate higher vulnerability while negative values indicate lower 
vulnerability.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.8 
Households remain very cautious with regard to spending despite a solid labour 
market and high levels of income growth over the last two years

a) Growth in nominal and real disposable 
income and saving ratio

(Q1 2022-Q4 2027E, percentages) 
(Q1 2005-Q3 2025, percentages)

Sources: Eurostat and ECB. 
Notes: Panel a: the dashed lines represent the pre-2020 averages for nominal disposal income growth and the saving ratio. The dotted 
line is the saving ratio shown in the September 2025 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.9 
Financial conditions and the improved housing market outlook are boosting demand 
for residential real estate, while housing supply remains subdued

a) Changes in demand and credit standards 
for housing loans

(Q1 2019-Q3 2025, net percentages) 
(Jan. 2005-Oct. 2025, indices)

Sources: ECB (BLS), Eurostat and S&P Global Market Intelligence. 
Note: Panel b: the latest observation for data on building permits is for July 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.10 
Housing prices exhibit robust growth in several countries, while tail risks remain 
elevated in some markets

a) RRE price growth and changes in 
household debt/income ratios

b) Estimated downside risk to RRE prices over 
the next year

(x-axis: annual growth rate, percentages, y-axis: change in 
household debt/income ratio, percentages)

Sources: ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the chart includes only countries with household debt/income data available for Q1 2025. The one-year RRE price 
growth data refer to Q2 2025 for all countries except for Austria, which displays data as of Q3 2025. HH stands for household. 
Panel b: the chart shows the results obtained from an RRE price-at-risk model based on a panel quantile regression on a sample of 19 
euro area countries. The chart shows the fifth percentile of the predicted RRE price growth for the euro area aggregate and the 10-90th 
percentile range of this estimate across individual euro area countries. For further details, see the article entitled “The analytical toolkit for 
the assessment of residential real estate vulnerabilities”, Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 19, ECB, October 2022.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.11 
Euro area CRE markets show signs of stabilisation but market activity remains 
subdued, particularly among offices, amid broader investor uncertainty

a) CRE market sentiment 
b) Number of CRE transactions

(Q1 2016-Q2 2025; share of investors surveyed, percentages) 
(Q4 2019-Q2 2025; total transactions, four-quarter rolling sum: 
index: 100 = Q4 2019)

Sources: RICS, MSCI and ECB calculations.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

29 Ultra-long bonds commonly refer to bonds with a maturity of 30 years or more.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

30 Based on GDP-weighted average yields for the four biggest euro area economies.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.1 
Yield curves have steepened on the back of rising ultra-long yields, while financing 
needs are high

a) 30-year benchmark sovereign bond yields 
b) Net issuance and euro area sovereign bond 
yields

(Jan. 1995-Nov. 2025, percentages) 
(2014-25; € billions, percentages)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., ECB, national central banks and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: sovereign bond yields are shown at monthly frequency (month-end). The latest observations are for 18 November 2025. 
Panel b: net issuance is defined as gross issuance minus redemptions of central government bonds by euro area national governments 
and minus Eurosystem purchases. Yield data refer to the GDP-weighted average ten-year yield of euro area sovereign bonds, averaged 
over the respective year. The 2025 yield value represents the average up to 18 November 2025.

31 See Ferrara, F.M. et al., “Hedge funds: good or bad for market functioning?”, The ECB Blog, ECB, 13 
September 2024.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.2 
The French yield has risen above the Italian yield amid the convergence of bond 
spreads in the euro area

a) Spread between Italian and French ten-year 
bond yields

b) French spread and average of euro area 
sovereign spreads versus Germany

(1 Jan. 1998-18 Nov. 2025, percentage points) 
(1 Jan. 2024-18 Nov. 2025, percentage points)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: Italian and French spreads are the respective ten-year sovereign bond yields versus the German Bund yield. Panel b: 
average spread is the GDP-weighted average of the Belgian, Irish, Greek, Spanish, Italian, Dutch, Austrian, Portuguese and Finnish 
sovereign bond yields versus the German Bund yield. The spreads shown are for ten-year sovereign bonds.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.3 
Sovereign bond spreads are sensitive to changes in sovereign debt trajectories

a) Spreads versus five-year forward 
debt-to-GDP ratios

b) French five-year sovereign and corporate 
bond yields

(ratios, basis points) 
(2 Jan. 2023-18 Nov. 2025, percentages)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., IMF and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: spread is versus Germany (ten-year yield). Debt-to-GDP ratios are IMF projections for the year 2030 as of October 2025. 
The latest observations are for 18 November 2025. Panel b: “Corporate bond index” refers to the yield of the Bloomberg France 
Corporate Index. “Selected corporate bonds” is the range of yield-to-worst values for six different bonds of French issuers. Bonds were 
selected by filtering the 20 bonds in the Bloomberg France Corporate Index with the highest amount outstanding covering 
euro-denominated bonds with a residual maturity of between three and seven years.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.4 
Gold price rally may reflect rise in tail risk while swaps indicate little concern about 
upside inflation risks in the United States

a) US inflation swap curve 
b) Gold price and flows into gold ETFs

Prepared by Paolo Alberto Baudino, Julian Metzler, Manuela Storz and Fabian Wagner

36 For procyclical outflows from euro area investment funds after tariff announcements, see the chapter 
entitled “Non-bank financial sector”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2025.

37 See Allaire, N., Breckenfelder, J. and Hoerova, M., “Fund fragility: the role of investor base”, Working 
Paper Series, No 2874, ECB, 2023.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart A 
Households have become important investors in euro area investment funds over the past decade 
and demonstrated resilience during the recent tariff-related turmoil

a) Holdings of euro area-domiciled equity and 
high-yield corporate bond funds, by major holding 
sector

b) Cumulative flows in euro area-domiciled 
investment funds after tariff and tariff pause 
announcements, by holding sector

(Q1 2017-Q2 2025, percentages of total net assets) 
(24 Mar.-18 Apr. 2025, percentages of total net assets)

Sources: ECB (SHS), EPFR Global and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel b: cumulative flows are obtained at fund-share level for euro area-domiciled investment from EPFR Global at a daily frequency. We obtain 
information about the holder structure of fund shares from the SHS dataset. For each quarter, the investor group that holds the majority of the outstanding fund 
shares will be classified as the investor base for that fund share. The category “Institutionals” includes holdings of fund shares by investment funds, pension 
funds, insurance corporations, banks, public institutions and other financial institutions. We calculate the holdings of foreign investors as the residual between 
total net assets of the respective share class and euro area holdings from the SHS dataset (households + institutionals). Foreign sector holdings may be 
overstated under this approach, as the SHS dataset does not capture euro area holdings held via non-euro area custodians. However, Beck et al.* find that such 
holdings are likely very limited, and that the majority of assets held via non-euro area custodians can be attributed to non-euro area investors. 
*) Beck, R., Coppola, A., Lewis, A., Maggiori, M., Schmitz, M. and Schreger, J., “The Geography of Capital Allocation in the Euro Area”, NBER Working Papers, 
No 32275, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2024.

38 Based on monthly data since 2018 for euro area equity and high-yield corporate bond funds, households’ 
investments are approximately 40% less sensitive to changes in fund performance relative to other 
investors.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

for all four episodes considered: the China-US trade tensions of 2018, the outbreak of the COVID-19 
pandemic, market reactions to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and ensuing inflation spikes, 
and the most recent tariff announcement by the US Administration in April 2025. In the context of the 
2018 trade tensions, for example, outflows from funds mainly held by foreign investors were about 0.9 
percentage points of total net fund assets higher than those from funds mainly held by households 
(Chart B, panel a).

Chart B 
Households’ behaviour in euro area investment funds is less procyclical during market downturns 
than that of institutional investors

a) Impact of foreign and 
institutional investors on fund 
flows relative to households

b) Positive impact of household 
investors on flows into equity 
funds in April 2025

c) Positive impact of household 
investors on flows into high-yield 
bond funds in April 2025

(percentage points of total net assets) 
(days before and after tariff announcement, 
percentage points)

(days before and after tariff announcement, 
percentage points)

Sources: ECB (SHS), EPFR Global and ECB calculations. 
Notes: For the regressions, we follow Allaire et al.* For all three panels, fund shares are classified as having a household investor base, an institutional investor 
base or a foreign investor base, in line with the approach adopted in Chart A, panel b. The regressions are set up as: ∆flowsi,t = β0 + β1Sk,t × Ii + μi,t + εi,t, where 
∆flowsi,t is the cumulative daily flow in fund share i at time t relative to ten days before the tariff announcement, expressed as a percentage of fund share i’s total 
net assets under management. Sk,t is a dummy that takes the value 1 in a stress period k. For panel a, k describes being before or after the breakout point of a 
stress episode, while for panels b and c, Sk,t is a daily dummy variable. For panel a, Ii takes the value 1 if the investor type is either foreign or institutional, 
making households the baseline investor group. For panels b and c, Ii takes the value 1 if the investor type is households, making all other investor groups the 
baseline. We capture fund share and time specific fixed effects with μi,t. 
All regressions are estimated within a period of ten days before and after the breakout of an episode of market stress. The time periods considered are (i) the 
trade tensions between China and the United States in November/December 2018, (ii) the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in February and March 2020, (iii) 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the resulting energy price inflation during February and March 2022, and (iv) the announcement of global tariffs by the US 
Administration during March and April 2025. The precise cut-off dates used for the regressions were determined by volatility in total fund flows. 
*) Allaire, N., Breckenfelder, J. and Hoerova, M., “Fund fragility: the role of investor base”, Working Paper Series, No 2874, ECB, 2023.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart C 
Further deconstructing household investor dynamics reveals pockets of procyclicality through indirect 
investment both via funds of funds and by speculative retail investors

a) Cumulative flows into euro 
area-domiciled investment funds 
held by funds of funds, by ultimate 
holder structure

b) Retail investor sentiment and its correlation with global equity 
markets

(24 Mar.-18 Apr. 2025, percentages of total net 
assets)

(1 Jan. 2018-31 Oct. 2025; upper panel: difference between positive and negative sentiment z-scores 
and MSCI World z-scores, lower panel: correlation coefficients)

Sources: ECB (CSDB, SHS), EPFR Global, LSEG Lipper, Reddit (Academic Torrents), OpenAI, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: funds of funds are identified via LSEG Lipper as investment funds that hold euro area equity or high-yield corporate bond funds included in the 
regression sample. To capture the main indirect holders, we focus on equity and high-yield bond funds whose shares are predominantly held by other investment 
funds. We then apply a look-through approach, using granular portfolio data to identify which funds hold these shares. For each equity or high-yield fund, we then 
aggregate the investor base of the funds of funds that invest in it, weighting each fund by the size of its holdings. This provides a proxy for the investor base of 
euro area equity and high-yield corporate bond funds in the sample. The analysis is restricted to cases where at least 25% of a fund’s indirect investor base can 
be identified using LSEG Lipper portfolio data. Panel b: net retail sentiment is constructed from post titles on Reddit’s r/wallstreetbets subreddit from 2018 
onwards. Posts are classified into market-related topics (equities, funds, macro, options, commodities, geopolitics, tariffs and crypto) using OpenAI’s GPT-4o 
model, with unrelated content, such as community posts, excluded. The dataset comprises around 1.8 million posts which the AI model labels as positive, 
negative or neutral. Net sentiment is defined as the difference between the 365-day z-scores of positive and negative posts, where each post is weighted by the 
logarithm of its comments and upvotes to proxy its relative importance in the forum. The MSCI World series shows the 365-day z-score of daily index levels. The 
lower panel reports the 365-day rolling correlation between net retail sentiment and MSCI World z-scores.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

2.3 
Risk of spillovers across markets as concentration and 
exposures increase

39 In the November Bank of America global fund manager survey, 53% of respondents (54% in October, 
42% in September, 41% in August and 36.5% in July) stated that “AI stocks are now in a bubble”, while 
39% (38% in October, 48% in September, 52% in August and 54% in July) stated that there is no AI 
bubble. In the November survey, 45% of respondents indicated that they view an “AI bubble” as the 
biggest tail risk (up from 33% in October, which was the first time an “AI bubble” had ranked as the 
biggest tail risk in the history of the survey).

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.8 
Concentration in US equity markets has reached new highs, with valuations backed by 
outstanding earnings growth and expectations that AI will boost productivity

a) Equity market concentration among top 1% 
of companies

b) Growth of earnings per share for S&P 500 
companies

(2002-25, percentages) 
(1 Jan. 2021-18 Nov. 2025; index = 100 on 1 Jan. 2021)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the columns show the share of the top 1% of EURO STOXX and S&P 500 companies (i.e. the top three and five 
companies respectively), by market capitalisation, in the total market capitalisation of the indices, broken down by Global Industry 
Classification Standards (GICS). The latest observations are for 18 November 2025. Panel b: the blue line shows earnings per share of 
the “Magnificent 7” technology firms (Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta, Microsoft, Nvidia and Tesla), which has been indexed to 100 on 1 
January 2021. The yellow line shows the same measure for the remaining S&P 500 companies, i.e. all S&P 500 companies excluding the 
seven technology firms listed above. The black vertical line marks 30 November 2022, the day ChatGPT was launched to the public by 
OpenAI.

40 Adverse news might range from signs that expected productivity gains are not materialising to 
disappointments over earnings at a time when expectations are already high. It might also include 
evidence of bottlenecks in energy and infrastructure capacities which could slow down AI growth.

41 While some bond issuances by US big tech companies have drawn attention over recent months, the IT 
sector share in MSCI Euro and US investment-grade and high-yield bond indices only ranged between 
1.8% and 8.3% in October 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.9 
Private markets are significantly exposed to the IT sector and might be affected by 
adverse news relating to AI

Share of IT sector firms in global private market transactions

Sources: PitchBook Data Inc. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: IT sector share is depicted separately for each of the three private market subsegments. The industry classification system 
developed by PitchBook is very similar to GICS. Industry sectors include business to business (B2B), business to consumer (B2C), 
energy, financial services, health care, information technology, and materials and resources. Since only the primary industry sector is 
used, B2B and B2C might include other IT-related companies. This means that the displayed IT sector share is a lower bound. The latest 
observations are for 18 November 2025.

42 See the special feature entitled “Private markets, public risk? Financial stability implications of alternative 
funding sources”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2024.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.1 
Headline profitability remains strong, but the growth of core revenues has come to a 
halt and cross-country differences in profitability levels persist

a) ROE and decomposition of year-on-year 
change in net income

(Q1 2021-Q2 2025; € billions, percentages) 
(Q4 2021, Q2 2025; percentages, percentage points)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Based on a sample of 87 significant institutions. Panel a: based on four-quarter trailing figures. Core revenues consist of net 
interest income and net fee and commission income. Panel b: country groups are based on whether the change in country-level return on 
assets (ROA) between Q4 2021 and Q2 2025 was above or below the median change. NII stands for net interest income; NONII stands 
for non-interest income; COST stands for operating costs; LLP stands for loan loss provisions; TA stands for total assets. OTHER 
includes impairment on non-financial assets, negative goodwill, results from discontinued operations, extraordinary profit or loss and tax 
expenses, among other things.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.2 
Net interest income declined due to negative margin effects, while the growth of fee 
income has slowed

a) Decomposition of change in 
net interest income

b) Net interest margin levels 
and changes, by rate-fixation 
type

c) Decomposition of NFCI 
growth and asset 
management volumes

(Q1 2022-Q2 2025; percentages, 
percentage points)

(Q1 2022-Q2 2025; percentages, basis 
points)

(Q1 2022-Q2 2025; percentages, 
percentage points)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: based on a balanced sample of 78 significant institutions. Net interest income (NII) change and its components refer to 
year-on-year changes. Panel b: based on a balanced sample of 73 significant institutions. Quarter-on-quarter changes. NIM stands for 
net interest margin. Banks are split into “mostly floating” and “mostly fixed” groups (53 and 20 banks respectively) based on whether they 
have a floating- or fixed-rate loan share above 50%. Panel c: based on a balanced sample of 87 significant institutions. Year-on-year 
growth of trailing net fee and commission income. NFCI stands for net fee and commission income; FCI stands for fee and commission 
income; AM stands for asset management.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.3 
The growth of operating expenses has picked up somewhat since early 2024, while 
provisioning costs remain subdued

a) Growth of total operating 
costs and its main drivers

b) Dispersion of country-level 
cost/assets ratios

c) Ratio of loan loss 
provisions to total loans, by 
country group

(Q1 2021-Q2 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2020-Q2 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2022-Q2 2025, percentages)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data, wage tracker) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Based on a balanced sample of 87 significant institutions. Panel a: year-on-year growth of trailing figures. Non-staff costs include 
other administrative costs and depreciation. RFs stands for resolutions funds; DGSs stands for deposit guarantee schemes. Panel c: 
loan loss provisions contain impairments on financial assets. Long-term average is calculated for Q4 2015-Q2 2025. Country groups are 
based on whether a country’s NPL ratio was above/below the median country-level NPL ratio in Q4 2021.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.4 
The near-term earnings outlook has improved during 2025, propelling banks’ equity 
valuations to the highest level since before the global financial crisis

a) 2025-26 ROE projections 
and change in projections for 
main profit drivers

b) Euro area banks’ 
(long-term) price/earnings and 
price-to-book ratios

c) Decomposition of 
cumulative changes in bank 
share prices

(left graph: percentages, right graph: 
€ billions)

(Jan. 2005-Nov. 2025, multiples) 
(Jan.-Nov. 2025; percentages, percentage 
points)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: based on median analyst projections aggregated for a sample of 23 listed banks. Right graph: changes in projections 
since the beginning of 2025. ROE stands for return on equity; NII stands for net interest income; FCI stands for fee and commission 
income; NTI stands for net trading income; COST stands for operating costs; LLP stands for loan loss provisions. Panel b: based on the 
EURO STOXX Banks index. The long-term price/earnings ratio is calculated as last price divided by the ten-year average real earnings 
per share. Panel c: decomposition of cumulative changes in the EURO STOXX Banks index based on the H-Model set out in Fuller and 
Hsia*. 
*) Fuller, R.J. and Hsia, C.-C., “A Simplified Common Stock Valuation Model”, Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 40, No 5, 1984, pp. 49-56.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

3.2 
Banks are benefiting from favourable financing conditions

Chart 3.5 
Bank bond yields and spreads are compressed, and market issuance remains orderly

a) Secondary bond market bond yields and 
spreads of euro area banks

b) Primary bond market issuance by euro area 
banks

(3 Jan. 2022-18 Nov. 2025; percentages, basis points) 
(Jan. 2019-Oct. 2025, € billions)

Sources: S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates, Dealogic and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: “Current” indicates the latest observed spread. Panel b: “Historical range” indicates minimum and maximum of the total 
bond issuance in a given month, from 2019 to 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.6 
Deposit rates have fallen, supporting banks’ net interest income

a) Average deposit rates 
offered by euro area banks

c) Contribution of deposit 
spread to euro area bank net 
interest income

(Jan. 2022-Sep. 2025, percentages) 
(Jan. 1999-Sep. 2025, coefficient) 
(Q1 2019-Q2 2025, € billions)

Sources: ECB (MIR, BSI, supervisory data) and ECB calculations 
Notes: NFC stands for non-financial corporation; HH stands for household. Panel a: rates on new business. Panel b: change in rate on 
new business divided by change in the deposit facility rate, Deposit betas for the hiking cycle are calculated on the period from January 
2022 to November 2023 for term and redeemable-at-notice deposits and from January 2022 to May 2024 for overnight deposits, 
reflecting the peak of different deposit rates. Easing betas for agreed maturity (AM)/redeemable-at-notice (RED) and for overnight (ON) 
deposits consider the period from November 2023 and May 2024 until September 2025 respectively. “Historical range of previous hiking 
betas” refers to the peak betas reached during previous hiking cycles in November 2000, November 2005 and September 2011. Panel c: 
the deposit spread contribution is the hypothetical spread that banks could earn from placing funding obtained from household and NFC 
deposits on the overnight money market. It is computed as the total deposit volume in a given period multiplied by the euro short-term 
rate (€STR) minus the actual interest expense on household and NFC deposits in that period. “Other contributions to net interest income” 
is net interest income minus the hypothetical deposit spread income.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.7 
Banks’ funding structures have shifted towards overnight deposits and market-based 
funding

a) Deposit term spread and term/overnight 
deposit ratio

b) Year-on-year change in bank funding 
composition

(Jan. 2003-Sep. 2025; percentages, ratio) 
(Q2 2024-Q2 2025, percentages of total liabilities)

Sources: ECB (MIR, BSI, supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the term spread is the difference between the average term and overnight deposit rate. The term/overnight deposit ratio 
is the total stock of retail term deposits divided by overnight deposits. Panel b: total liabilities exclude equity financing, and government 
deposits with euro area banks are regional government and agency deposits.

46 Between 2008 and 2025, the share of household and NFC overnight deposits in banks’ total funding rose 
from about 11% to 24% (source: ECB (BSI)). Three factors contributed to this development: (i) the 
financial assets of the non-financial private sector grew more than those of the financial sector, (ii) 
households and NFCs shifted their assets away from bonds towards deposits, and (iii) term deposits 
were substituted with overnight deposits (source: Eurostat).

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Box 3 
 
US dollar activities of European banks: business models and financial stability implications

Prepared by Maciej Grodzicki, Urtė Kalinauskaitė, Benjamin Klaus, Chloe Larkou, Francesca Lenoci and 
Allegra Pietsch

US dollar activities are concentrated among euro area global systemically important banks 
(G-SIBs), which intermediate US dollars to other European parties. In contrast to other major 
currencies, US dollar activities relate almost exclusively to wholesale business.47 The breakdown of 
euro area banks’ US dollar assets and liabilities reveals the high weight of capital market activities 
relative to loans and deposits from the non-financial sector (Chart A, panel a). Other financial assets 
and liabilities, which include primarily the positive fair value of derivatives, are the largest balance 
sheet position denominated in US dollars. They are followed by repo borrowing, debt securities 
funding, holdings of debt securities and deposits taken from banks and other financial institutions.

Banks’ dollar-denominated credit exposures are largely limited to holding high-quality debt 
securities and lending to the non-financial corporate sector. Euro area banks’ debt securities 
holdings denominated in US dollars consist mainly of US Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed 
securities, followed by debt issued by non-US governments and financial institutions. These 
securities qualify as high-quality liquid assets. Euro area banks’ dollar-denominated lending is 
estimated to be close to €700 billion at the least (9.2% of the total loan book), with most of this going 
to non-euro area corporate and non-bank financial clients (Chart A, panel b).48

47 Other significant currencies include the pound sterling and the currencies of various Nordic and central 
and eastern European states. Business in these currencies usually includes local retail and corporate 
banking. Wholesale activities have a more limited share than is the case for US dollar activities.

48 These estimates are based on euro area credit register data, which do not include retail loans and loans 
booked at euro area banks’ non-euro area subsidiaries. They therefore constitute a lower bound for total 
dollar-denominated lending.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart A 
Capital markets business dominates in euro area banks’ US dollar activities

a) Dollar-denominated assets and liabilities of 48 
euro area significant institutions, by bank type

b) Dollar-denominated securities holdings and bank 
lending of euro area banks

(Q4 2024, € trillions) 
(Q4 2024, percentages)

Source: ECB (supervisory data, SHS, AnaCredit) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: based on annual funding plan reports by 48 banks, including five global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), for which US dollar-denominated 
liabilities account for over 5% of their total liabilities. The share of these banks in the total assets of significant institutions supervised by the ECB amounts to 
56%. The data on repos use the liquidity coverage ratio template and capture only transactions with a residual maturity up to 30 days, while the data on reverse 
repo lending to financials use the net stable funding ratio template. “Other financial assets/liabilities” mainly includes trading assets and liabilities such as 
derivatives, equity and fund shares, and repo borrowing with a residual maturity of more than 30 days. “Other banks” includes, among others, euro area 
subsidiaries of US banking groups. Panel b: covers all euro area significant institutions, meaning numbers are larger than in panel a. Data exclude subsidiaries 
of non-euro area banks in the euro area and loans held in the foreign subsidiaries of euro area banking groups. The debt of supranational issuers is included in 
non-US non-euro area sovereign debt. Lending data are based on the AnaCredit dataset and exclude retail loans to households, loans to banks, reverse repo 
transactions and intragroup exposures. EA stands for euro area. “Non-banks” refers to non-bank financial intermediation entities.

The US dollar activities of euro area banks in capital markets represent a diverse set of 
financial services to the economy. Euro area banks, especially some of the G-SIBs, are present in 
US money markets, where they act as intermediaries by sourcing funding from money market funds 
and lending the proceeds to hedge funds on a secured basis.49 Euro area investment funds, life 
insurers and pension funds invest in dollar-denominated assets, despite their euro-denominated 
obligations to fund-shareholders or policyholders. Euro area banks facilitate these counterparties’ 
needs to mitigate the resulting currency risk by engaging in FX swaps, effectively receiving US dollars 
and paying euro to investment funds, insurance corporations and pension funds. Euro area banks 
partially hedge this currency risk by taking opposite positions with global banks (Chart B, panel a). 
These US dollar liabilities are not visible on bank balance sheets.50 Euro area banks also provide 
currency hedges to euro area exporters and importers, although such hedging trades are on a 
smaller scale than those associated with euro area financial investors. For instance, as of July 2025, 
banks are facilitating US dollar payments to non-financial corporations via currency swaps, primarily 
to stabilise such corporations’ import costs rather than to manage dollar-denominated revenue flows.

49 For more details on the repo and FX swap activities of euro area banks, see the box entitled “Euro area 
banks as intermediators of US dollar liquidity via repo and FX swap markets”, Financial Stability Review, 
ECB, November 2024.

50 Banks may secure funding synthetically from other institutions via FX swaps, resulting in 
off-balance-sheet US dollar liabilities. Rolling over these positions can become challenging during 
periods of stress in FX swap markets.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart B 
Euro area banks’ US dollar intermediation activities

a) Euro area banks’ net dollar-denominated FX swap 
and CIRS positions

b) Cumulative contractual gap between US dollar 
inflows and outflows to/from euro area banks

(Q2 2025, € billions) 
(Q4 2024, percentages of US dollar HQLA)

Source: ECB (EMIR, sector enrichment based on Lenoci and Letizia*, supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: foreign exchange (FX) swap and cross-currency interest rate swap (CIRS) positions of euro area banks with other counterparties, netted within 
maturity bucket. Within the same maturity bucket, euro area banks’ derivatives positions with the same counterparty sector are netted against each other. A 
positive net position indicates that the euro area banks are committed to receiving US dollars and paying euro with a specific time bucket. “Banks” includes net 
derivatives positions with banks that are not supervised by the ECB. NFCs stands for non-financial corporations; IFs stands for investment funds, including 
money market mutual funds; ICPFs stands for insurance corporations and pension funds; OFIs stands for other financial intermediaries. Panel b: the periods 
denote the residual maturity of the contractual inflows and outflows. The net contractual gap is calculated as the sum of the net contractual outflows (gross 
inflows less gross outflows) scheduled over a given horizon and presented as a share of dollar-denominated HQLA. G-SIBs stands for global systemically 
important banks; IWBs stands for investment and wholesale banks; UDIs stands for universal and diversified institutions, which include universal banks and 
diversified lenders; HQLA stands for high-quality liquid assets. 
*) See Lenoci, F.D. and Letizia, E., “Classifying Counterparty Sector in EMIR Data”, in Consoli, S., Reforgiato Recupero, D. and Saisana, M. (eds.), Data Science 
for Economics and Finance, Springer, Cham, 2021.

52 For example, the value of US Treasuries declined during the market turmoil triggered by the tariff 
announcements in April 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

a) Aggregate NPL ratio and quarterly net NPL 
flows, by sector

b) Quarterly net NPL flows for CRE lending

(Q1 2021-Q2 2025; percentages, € billions) 
(Q1 2021-Q2 2025, € billions)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: based on full sample of significant institutions (113 banks as at Q2 2025). Panel a: NFCs stands for non-financial corporations; 
HHs stands for households. Panel b: excludes loans held for sale.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

a) SME NPL ratio, by country group and SME 
default rate

b) NPL ratio for consumer loans, by region

(Q1 2022-Q2 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2023-Q2 2025, percentages)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: based on a sample of 87 significant institutions for NPL ratios and 56 IRB-reporting significant institutions for default 
rates. Country groups are based on whether a country’s SME NPL ratio was above/below the median value of country-level SME NPL 
ratios in Q4 2021. “NPL ratio (high NPL)” and “NPL ratio (low NPL)” show the contributions to the total SME NPL ratio of countries with 
high and low initial NPL ratios. Panel b: based on a sample of 65 significant institutions which report a geographical breakdown of their 
loan portfolios.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

53 See the special feature entitled “Risks to euro area financial stability from trade tensions”, Financial 
Stability Review, ECB, May 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.10 
NPL coverage ratios have remained broadly unchanged in recent quarters, while 
stable cost-of-risk trends for total loans hide some divergence across sectors since 
late 2023

a) Coverage of NPLs by provisions, collateral 
and financial guarantees (for total loans)

b) Banks’ cost of risk, by stage and sector

(Q1 2021-Q2 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2020-Q2 2025, percentages of total loans)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: based on a sample of 87 significant institutions. Panel b: based on a sample of 80 IFRS-reporting significant institutions. 
Four-quarter trailing figures. POCI stands for purchased or originated credit-impaired financial assets; NFC stands for non-financial 
corporation; HH stands for household.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.11 
Banks continue to absorb sovereign bonds, while excess liquidity remains ample

a) Unencumbered sovereign 
bond holdings of euro area 
banks

c) Estimated repricing risk 
from 200 bps shock in spreads

(Q1 2019-Q2 2025, € trillions) 
(Q1 2017-Q2 2025, percentages of LCR 
denominator)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data, SHS) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: EU sovereigns include bonds issued by EU institutions (e.g. the European Investment Bank). Panel b: sample of 77 
significant institutions. LCR stands for liquidity coverage ratio. Panel c: impact estimates represent losses in response to an interest rate 
shock of 200 basis points, for a sample of 87 significant institutions. LCR calculations only consider unencumbered Level 1 sovereign 
bonds (about 80% of total sovereign bond holdings); for CET1 ratios, only bonds accounted for at fair value (in other comprehensive 
income or through profit and loss) are included; for return on equity (ROE), the impact from bonds accounted for at fair value through 
profit and loss is included. The reported impact is gross of hedging, which means it may be overestimated.

54 See also the box entitled “Euro area bank fundamentals, valuations and cost of equity”, Financial Stability 
Review, ECB, November 2023.

55 See “2025 EU-wide Stress Test”, European Banking Authority, 1 August 2025, and “Macroprudential 
Bulletin”, Issue 32, ECB, November 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.12 
Banks’ return on equity is now sufficient to increase capital while meeting shareholder 
return requirements

a) Return on equity and cost of equity of 
listed euro area banks

b) Aggregate CET1 ratio and decomposition of 
changes in capital headroom

(Jan. 2016-June 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2015-Q2 2025, Q2 2024-Q2 2025; percentages of 
risk-weighted assets)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data), Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: for a balanced sample of 29 listed banks. Return on equity is the four-quarter trailing sum. The cost of equity of euro area 
banks is estimated based on Altavilla et al.* Panel b: OCI stands for other comprehensive income; OCR stands for overall capital 
requirement; P2G stands for Pillar 2 guidance. Capital instruments capture share buybacks, while retained earnings are calculated after 
dividend payouts. 
*) Altavilla, C., Bochmann, P., De Ryck, J., Dumitru, A.-M., Grodzicki, M., Kick, H., Melo Fernandes, C., Mosthaf, J., O’Donnell, C. and 
Palligkinis, S., “Measuring the cost of equity of euro area banks”, Occasional Paper Series, No 254, ECB, 2021.

56 See the final results of the 2025 stress test of euro area banks.

57 In July and October 2025, Spain and Greece increased their countercyclical capital buffer rates to 1.0% 
and 0.5% respectively, effective October 2026, with the aim of reaching the positive neutral target rates. 
Austria introduced a sectoral systemic risk buffer (sSyRB) of 1.0% for commercial real estate exposures 
in June, while Germany reduced its sSyRB on residential real estate exposures to 1.0% in April after 
reassessing risks. France deactivated its sSyRB in June for exposures to highly indebted non-financial 
corporations. Belgium announced the deactivation of its sSyRB on mortgage exposures and a 
simultaneous increase in its countercyclical capital buffer rate from 1.0% to 1.25%, effective July 2026.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

59 On the economic costs of systemic financial crises, see, for example, Lo Duca, M. et al., “A new database 
for financial crises in European countries – ECB/ESRB EU crises database”, Occasional Paper Series, 
No 194, ECB, July 2017 (updated 2021).

60 For example, a 2023 report by the European Banking Federation and Oliver Wyman argues that euro 
area banks have to operate in a more stringent and more complex capital framework than their US 
counterparts, which contributes to their weaker competitiveness. The report estimates that easing capital 
requirements and streamlining supervision could unlock capacity amounting to an additional €4 trillion in 
bank lending, potentially boosting economic growth across Europe.

61 See, for example, Lang, J.H. and Menno, D., “The state-dependent impact of changes in bank capital 
requirements”, Working Paper Series, No 2828, ECB, 2023, and Behn, M., Forletta, M. and Reghezza, 
A., “Buying insurance at low economic cost – the effects of bank capital buffer increases since the 
pandemic”, Working Paper Series, No 2951, ECB, 2024.

63 For more details, see Behn, M. and Reghezza, A., “Capital requirements: a pillar or a burden for bank 
competitiveness?”, Occasional Paper Series, No 376, ECB, 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.13 
Bank competitiveness, as measured by profit efficiency, is unrelated to overall capital 
requirements, but higher CET1 ratios enhance competitiveness up to a certain point

a) Estimated association between banks’ 
overall capital requirement ratios and profit 
efficiency

b) Estimated non-linear association between 
banks’ CET1 ratios and profit efficiency

(percentiles, index scores) 
(percentages, index scores)

Sources: ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Profit efficiency is defined as a bank’s ability to produce the maximum output (profit) feasible given its inputs (costs). It is 
computed using data envelopment analysis. The methodology employs inputs (cost of equity, interest expenses, administrative 
expenses, provisioning costs and staff expenses) and outputs (interest and non-interest income) to compute profit efficiency scores. 
Profit efficiency scores range between zero and one. A higher score indicates a higher level of profit efficiency. The profit efficiency 
scores are then employed to study the relationship between profit efficiency, as a measure of competitiveness, and both overall capital 
requirements (OCR) and the CET1 ratio. Panel a) shows the estimated profit efficiency scores at various levels of banks’ OCR ratios. 
These levels correspond to the descriptive statistics of the OCR ratio: 8%, 8.5%, 9.5%, 10% and 10.5%, which represent the 10th 
percentile, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile and 90th percentile of the OCR distribution respectively. The confidence intervals are 
reported at the 95% level. The dependent variable is the profit score, and the regression controls for a large set of bank and 
country-specific characteristics, including the logarithm of total bank assets, the non-performing loans ratio, the cash and cash at the 
central bank/total assets ratio, the deposits/total assets ratio, the loan/total assets ratio, the industrial production index, the inflation rate, 
the slope of the yield curve and the total assets Herfindahl-Hirschman Index. Bank and quarter fixed effects are included in all 
regressions. The estimation sample is for Q4 2019-Q4 2024. Panel b) plots the estimated profit efficiency scores (blue line) along with a 
95% confidence interval (grey shaded area) at various levels of bank CET1 ratios. The inverted U-shaped relationship is modelled using 
a quadratic interaction term for the CET1 ratio variable in the econometric specification. The regressions control for the same set of bank 
and country-specific characteristics as those described above.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

65 See “Commission proposes to postpone by one additional year the market risk prudential requirements 
under Basel III”, press release, European Commission, 12 June 2025.

66 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2025/1496 of 12 June 2025 amending Regulation (EU) No 
575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the date of application of the own 
funds requirements for market risk (OJ L, 2025/1496, 19.9.2025).

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

68 See Zsámboki, B., Doležal, J., Singh, J., Leitner, G. and Vasilakos, S., “Buffer usability in a complex 
world”, Occasional Paper Series, No 374, ECB, 2025. The authors estimate buffer usability to be around 
40-50%, depending on the analytical approach used.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

a) Investor base of long-term sovereign debt, 
by residual maturity

b) Cumulative net change in total outstanding 
versus total non-bank holdings of sovereign 
debt, by NBFI segment and maturity

Sources: ECB (CSDB, CSEC, SHS) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the referenced sectors refer to euro area holders, while “Other” includes other non-specified euro area holders, non-euro 
area holders and the Eurosystem. Insurance corporations, investment funds and pension funds constitute the NBFI sector. Panel b: net 
issuance is defined as cumulative quarter-on-quarter net changes in issued securities, while non-bank absorption refers to cumulative 
quarter-over-quarter net changes in the holdings of the euro area NBFI sector. “Other” includes all other euro area holders besides those 
listed in the chart.

69 Estimates of the non-bank share in NFC credit depend heavily on the inclusion of a residual of other 
financial intermediaries (OFIs). Excluding OFIs, the measure amounts to 23% of euro area NFC credit. 
For more details, see Box 2 in “Financial Integration and Structure in the Euro Area”, ECB, 2022.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

a) Weighted average equity PE ratios in 
non-bank portfolios

b) Weighted average bond spreads in 
non-bank portfolios

(Q1 2015-Q2 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2015-Q2 2025, percentage points)

Sources: ECB (SHS), LSEG and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the price/earnings (PE) ratio calculation is limited to non-bank holdings within the S&P 500, EURO STOXX 600, Nikkei 
225 and FTSE 100 indices, accounting for their changing compositions over time. The metric used is the 12-month forward PE ratio. The 
PE ratios are weighted by the market value of each equity holding relative to the total market value of the portfolio. Panel b: the spreads 
are calculated as the difference between an individual security’s yield to maturity and a corresponding benchmark rate. 
Euro-denominated holdings are benchmarked against the euro area ten-year government benchmark bond yield while US dollar and all 
other currency holdings are benchmarked against the ten-year US Treasury yield. Each security’s yield is compared with the respective 
common ten-year benchmark, regardless of its individual maturity. In a standard, upward-sloping yield curve environment, yields on 
shorter-maturity bonds can be lower than the ten-year benchmark rate. The spreads are weighted by the market value of each individual 
debt security.

70 Defined benefit schemes guarantee retirees a predetermined benefit, typically financed by the employer 
and employee contributions and investor returns, with pension funds often favouring assets that generate 
predictable cash flows to match future liabilities. Defined contribution schemes, on the other hand, 
provide a variable benefit depending on the individual contributions to the scheme and the return on 
investment, reducing the sector’s need for liability matching and shifting market risk to individuals. As 
such, defined contribution schemes may allow or even encourage a greater allocation to riskier and 
potentially higher-yielding assets over long investment horizons.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

4.2 
Flows into investment funds recover, while hedge funds’ 
footprint and leverage continue to grow

a) Cumulative flows into euro 
area-domiciled investment 
funds, by fund focus

b) Monthly flows into euro 
area ETFs investing in US 
equities, by currency hedging

c) Cumulative flows into funds 
investing in European bonds, 
by maturity