# fed monetary policy report 2025 06

BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System

The President of the Senate 
The Speaker of the House of Representatives

The Board of Governors is pleased to submit its Monetary Policy Report 
pursuant to section 2B of the Federal Reserve Act.

Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v

Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii

Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Recent Economic and Financial Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Monetary Policy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Special Topics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Recent Economic and Financial Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Domestic Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Box 1.  Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Financial Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Box 2.  Developments Related to Financial Stability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
International Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

Monetary Policy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

Box 3.  Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets. . . . . . . 40
Box 4.  Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

Summary of Economic Projections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

Box 5.  Forecast Uncertainty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

Appendix: Source Notes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

This report reflects information that was publicly available as of noon EDT on June 18, 2025.

Unless otherwise stated, the time series in the figures extend through, for daily data,

June 16, 2025; for monthly data, May 2025; and, for quarterly data, 2025:Q1. In bar charts,

except as noted, the change for a given period is measured to its final quarter from the final

1 For figures 28, 39, and 45, note that the S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index, the S&P 500 
Index, and the Dow Jones Bank Index are products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and have been 
licensed for use by the Board. Copyright © 2025 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, a division of S&P Global, and/or its 
affiliates. All rights reserved. Redistribution, reproduction, and/or photocopying in whole or in part are prohibited with-
out written permission of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. For more information on any of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC’s 
indices, please visit www.spdji.com. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, and 
Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. Neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, 
Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, nor their third-party licensors make any representation or war-
ranty, express or implied, as to the ability of any index to accurately represent the asset class or market sector that 
it purports to represent, and neither S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC, their affiliates, 
nor their third-party licensors shall have any liability for any errors, omissions, or interruptions of any index or the data 
included therein.

Statement on Longer-Run Goals 
and Monetary Policy Strategy

Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as reaffirmed effective January 30, 2024

The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory man-

date from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-

term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public

Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic

in response to these disturbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of

monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee

sarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in

EPOP ratio
employment-to-population ratio

FOMC
Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee

G-SIB
global systemically important bank

JOLTS
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey

ON RRP
overnight reverse repurchase agreement

OPEC
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries

SLOOS
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices

VIX
implied volatility for the S&P 500 index

Recent Economic and Financial Developments

tures (PCE) rose 2.1 percent over the 12 months ending in April, down from 2.6 percent at the

end of last year. The core PCE price index—which excludes often-volatile food and energy prices

12 months ending in April, below the 2.9 percent increase observed at the end of last year.

remained within the range of values seen in the decade before the pandemic and continue to be

measures of domestic production, such as those from the labor market as well as manufacturing

output, rose solidly in the first quarter, although manufacturing has shown signs of weakness

more recently. In the housing market, new home construction has softened slightly this year,

while existing home sales remained depressed, with mortgage rates still elevated.

term inflation and downside risks to economic growth. The expected path for next year was nota-

bly lower, with financial market prices implying that the federal funds rate will decline more than

100 basis points from current levels to 3.3 percent by the end of 2026. Broad equity prices were

little changed but experienced sizable declines in early April following the announced changes to

low by historical standards. Credit continued to be broadly available to most nonfinancial firms,

households, and municipalities, but it stayed relatively tight for small businesses and households

porate debt, and residential real estate. Total debt of households and nonfinancial businesses

as a fraction of GDP continued to trend down and is now at its lowest level seen in the past two

International developments. Foreign growth picked up a bit in the first quarter of 2025, sup-

of expected tariff hikes. That said, indicators of business conditions and confidence in many

abroad. Headline inflation moderated further across most foreign economies. Several foreign

central banks have continued to lower policy rates, citing a deteriorating outlook for growth and

continued easing of inflationary pressures in their economies. However, foreign central bank com-

munications have generally emphasized the need to maintain policy flexibility amid considerable

uncertainty. Since early 2025, the broad dollar index—a measure of the exchange value of the

dollar against a trade-weighted basket of foreign currencies—decreased on net. The decline in

the dollar index was broad based, with depreciations against the currencies of both advanced and

Interest rate policy. Since the beginning of the year, the FOMC maintained the target range for

Balance sheet policy. The Federal Reserve has continued the process of significantly reducing its

holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a predictable manner and decided to further slow

the pace of this decline beginning in April. The Federal Reserve has reduced its holdings of Trea-

sury and agency securities by about $180 billion since the beginning of the year, bringing the total

reduction in securities holdings since mid-2022 to more than $2 trillion. The FOMC has stated

that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing monetary

policy efficiently and effectively in its ample-reserves regime, and it intends to stop reductions in

its securities holdings when reserve balances are somewhat above the level that it judges to be

Employment and earnings across groups. Employment disparities across sex, race, and edu-

cation groups remain near historically narrow levels amid a solid, but not especially tight, labor

market. Similarly, nominal wage growth also remains robust for most groups despite slowing

“Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups.”)

Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and money markets. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance

Usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility was little changed, while reserve

balances increased on net. Conditions in money markets remained stable. (See the box “Develop-

ments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”)

Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which prescribe a setting for the policy inter-

guidance to policymakers. With inflation easing and the unemployment rate staying low, the policy

rate prescriptions of most simple monetary policy rules have generally declined since 2023. Cur-

rently, most rules call for levels of the federal funds rate that are within the current target range.

(See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment.”)

Recent Economic and Financial 
Developments

After declining modestly last year, consumer price inflation continued to ease during the first

in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) was 2.1 percent in April, down

from 2.6 percent at the end of last year (figure 1). Meanwhile, inflation for core PCE prices—

the 12-month change receding from 2.9 percent in December to 2.5 percent in April. Similarly,

alternative measures that attempt to reduce the influence of idiosyncratic price movements on

trimmed mean measure of PCE prices constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas eased

from 2.8 percent in December to 2.5 percent in April.

Figure 1. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes

Trimmed mean
Total
Excluding food and energy

2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025

Note: The data extend through April 2025. The horizontal line indicates the Federal Open Market Committee’s 
objective of 2 percent inflation.

Consumer energy prices declined early this year, while food prices increased 
moderately

PCE energy prices declined, on net, during the early part of this year, with the 12-month change

through April indicating a drop of almost 6 percent following an increase of around 2 percent over

Figure 2. Price indexes for subcomponents of personal consumption expenditures

Housing services
Services ex. energy and housing
Goods ex. food, beverages, and energy

Food and beverages (right scale)
Energy (left scale)

Note: The data extend through April 2025. Percent change is from year earlier.

Figure 3. Spot and futures prices for crude oil

oil spot prices jumped following Israel’s attack

Brent spot price
24-month-ahead futures contracts

on Iran, while oil price futures beyond the

Note: The data are weekly averages of daily data and 
extend through June 13, 2025.

Meanwhile, PCE food prices have risen moder-

ately this year, with the 12-month change

through April indicating an increase of 1.9 per-

cent, a somewhat stronger gain than the mod-

est increase observed at the same time last

year (but still well below the large increases

observed following the COVID-19 pandemic

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
9

Figure 7. Measures of rental price inflation

PCE housing services prices
Apartment List single-family and multifamily units
Zillow single-family and multifamily units
RealPage multifamily units
Cotality single-family detached units

2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025

Note: Zillow data start in January 2016, and Apartment List data start in January 2018. Cotality, RealPage, and 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) data extend through April 2025. Apartment List, Zillow, RealPage, and 
Cotality measure market-rate rents—that is, rents for a new lease by a new tenant.

time last year and just a bit above its average pace during the 30 years prior to the pandemic.

from Blue Chip, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Atlanta, and the Survey of Profes-

sional Forecasters from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia have moved roughly sideways

in recent months and remain within the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. For

example, the median forecaster in the Survey of Professional Forecasters expects inflation to

average 2.0 percent over the five years beginning five years from now (figure 8). Similarly, market-

based measures of longer-term inflation compensation based on financial instruments linked to

inflation such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities have been little changed so far this year

(figure 9). An exception among the longer-term measures is the University of Michigan Surveys

of Consumers measure, in which the median expectation of inflation over the next 5 to 10 years

climbed from 3 percent in December to 4.1 percent in June.

tation of inflation over the next 12 months rose from 2.8 percent in December to 5.1 percent

Figure 8. Measures of inflation expectations

Figure 9. Inflation compensation implied by 
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities

Michigan survey median, next 12 months
Michigan survey median, next 5 to 10 years
SPF, next 10 years
SPF, 6 to 10 years ahead

Note: The data for the Michigan survey are monthly 
and extend through June 2025; the June data for 
the Michigan survey are preliminary. The data for 
the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) are 
quarterly and extend through 2025:Q2.

Note: The data are at a business-day frequency and 
are estimated from smoothed nominal and inflation-
indexed Treasury yield curves.

unemployment rate, at 4.2 percent in May,

rates among most age, educational attain-

ment, sex, and racial and ethnic groups have

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
11

Figure 11. Unemployment rate, by race and ethnicity

Black or African American
Hispanic or Latino
White
Asian

2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025

Note: All data shown are 3-month moving averages. Unemployment rate measures total unemployed as a percentage 
of the labor force. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Small sample sizes 
preclude reliable estimates for Native Americans and other groups for which monthly data are not reported by the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics.

as measured in the Job Openings and Labor

Turnover Survey (JOLTS) have edged down,

on net, so far this year and are a touch lower

than their average level last year. An alter-

native measure using job postings from the

large online job board Indeed has also moved

down somewhat this year and stands below

Note: The data shown are a 3-month moving average 
of the change in nonfarm payroll employment.

from the Current Population Survey has moved lower, on net, over the past year, while the hiring

rate from JOLTS has been little changed after having declined slowly from its peak in late 2021.

Layoffs indicators, such as initial claims for unemployment insurance and the layoffs rate from

JOLTS, were mostly little changed at low levels (figure 13).

. . . while labor supply growth has slowed

The LFPR, at 62.4 percent in May, has continued to edge down slowly, on net, from its peak in

Box 1. Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups

Figure A. Prime-age employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio,
by group

Percentage points
Sex and educational attainment

Asian
White
Black or African American
Hispanic or Latino

Women, some college or more
Women, high school or less
Men, some college or more
Men, high school or less

Note: The data are 3-month moving averages. Prime age is 25 to 54. All series are seasonally adjusted by 
Federal Reserve Board staff.

1 The EPOP ratio—that is, employment divided by population—can also be expressed as LFPR*(1-UR), where LFPR is the labor 
force participation rate and UR is the unemployment rate. The EPOP ratio therefore decreases as the LFPR decreases or as 
the unemployment rate increases. EPOP is multiplied by 100 for presentation purposes in the figures.

2 In figures A and B, EPOP ratios are shown indexed to their 2019 average; therefore, gaps between groups are not readily evident.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
13

among this group). The EPOP ratio for prime-age men both with and without some college education 
has changed little, on net, over the past two years.

Figure B. Employment-to-population ratios compared with the 2019 average ratio, by age

Note: The data are 3-month moving averages. All series are seasonally adjusted by Federal Reserve Board 
staff. Data before January 2024 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff to eliminate discontinuities in 
the published history.

4 For a discussion of the cyclical dynamics of labor force participation, see Tomaz Cajner, John Coglianese, and Joshua Montes 
(2021), “The Long-Lived Cyclicality of the Labor Force Participation Rate,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-047 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July), https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2021.047.

5 For an analysis on the increase in retirements following the pandemic, see Joshua Montes, Christopher Smith, and Juliana 
Dajon (2022), “ ‘The Great Retirement Boom’: The Pandemic-Era Surge in Retirements and Implications for Future Labor Force 
Participation,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-081 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, November), https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2022.081.

Figure C. Median real wage growth, by group

1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile

High school or less
Associate’s degree
Bachelor’s degree or more

Note: The data extend through April 2025. Series show 12-month moving averages of the median percent 
change in the hourly wage of individuals observed 12 months apart, deflated by the 12-month moving average 
of the 12-month percent change in the personal consumption expenditures price index. In the top-left panel, 
workers are assigned to wage quartiles based on the average of their wage reports in both Current Population 
Survey outgoing rotation group interviews; workers in the lowest 25 percent of the average wage distribution 
are assigned to the 1st quartile, and those in the top 25 percent are assigned to the 4th quartile.

6 For a discussion of labor market tightness and wage growth during the pandemic recovery, see David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, 
and Annie McGrew (2023), “The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market,” NBER Work-
ing Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March; revised May 2024), https://www.
nber.org/papers/w31010.

7 To reduce noise due to sampling variation, which can be pronounced when considering disaggregated groups’ wage changes, 
the series shown in figure C are the 12-month moving averages of the groups’ median 12-month real wage change. Thus, by 
construction, these series lag the actual real wage changes.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
15

Initial unemployment claims (right scale)
JOLTS layoff rate (left scale)

2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025

Note: The data for initial unemployment claims cover regular state programs, are reported as a 4-week moving 
average, and extend through June 7, 2025. The data for the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) layoff 
rate are monthly and extend through April 2025. Series are truncated at the top of the figure in 2020 and 2021.

mid-2023 (figure 14). However, participation

Figure 14. Labor force participation rate

rates for most age groups remain at or above

2019 levels other than for those aged 65

According to Census Bureau estimates, immi-

gration increased strongly from 2022 through

June 2024 and contributed to robust annual

population growth over this period.4 While

official Census Bureau immigration estimates

Note: Values before January 2024 are estimated 
by Federal Reserve Board staff to eliminate 
discontinuities in the published history.

are not yet available for the period after last

job openings) and the number of available workers (measured by the size of the labor force) was

around 150,000 in May, far below its 2022 peak of 6.1 million and somewhat below its 2019

4 See U.S. Census Bureau (2024), “Net International Migration Drives Highest U.S. Population Growth in Decades,” 
press release, December 19, https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2024/population-estimates-
international-migration.html.

5 Some of these more recent indicators include data from the Department of Homeland Security on encounters 
between migrants and Customs and Border Patrol agents on the southwest border; see U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security (2025), “Immigration Enforcement and Legal Processes Monthly Tables,” webpage, https://ohss.dhs.gov/
topics/immigration/immigration-enforcement/immigration-enforcement-and-legal-processes-monthly.

average of 1.2 million (figure 15). Similarly, the ratio of job openings to unemployed job seekers

was 1.0 in May, well below its peak of 2.0 reached in 2022 and a little below its average of 1.2

in 2019. Additionally, the share of respondents to the Conference Board Consumer Confidence

Survey who say that jobs are plentiful and the monthly percentage of the workforce that has quit

their job as measured in JOLTS (an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects) are

somewhat below 2019 levels. Finally, the unemployment rate in May was about ½ percentage

point higher than its 2019 average (but still below its average range over the past 50 years).

Figure 15. Available jobs versus available workers

2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025

Note: Available jobs are employment plus job openings as of the end of the previous month. Available workers are 
the labor force. Data for employment and labor force before January 2024 are estimated by Federal Reserve Board 
staff to eliminate discontinuities in the published history.

Labor productivity in the business sector

increased 1.2 percent over the year ending in

the first quarter of 2025 (figure 16).6 Pro-

ductivity growth has swung widely since the

onset of the pandemic, but looking through

this volatility, average labor productivity since

groups, see the box “Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups.”)

annual rate of 0.2 percent in the first quarter. Similarly, real gross domestic income, which meas­

Figure 18. Change in real gross domestic 
product, gross domestic income, and private 
domestic final purchases

Note: The key identifies bars in order from left to 
right. GDP is gross domestic product; GDI is gross 
domestic income; PDFP is private domestic final 
purchases.

and industrial production, which grew at solid rates in the first quarter.

In the manufacturing sector, output grew

strongly in the first quarter, with especially

large gains in industries that produce mate-

Note: The regional survey average comprises 
data from the Dallas Fed’s Texas Manufacturing 
Outlook Survey, the Kansas City Fed’s Survey of 
Tenth District Manufacturers, the New York Fed’s 
Empire State Manufacturing Survey, the Philadelphia 
Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey, 
and the Richmond Fed’s Fifth District Survey of 
Manufacturing Activity. ISM is Institute for Supply 
Management.

Among measures of economic activity that

tend to be less volatile than GDP, growth

in private domestic final purchases—that

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
19

is, consumer spending, business fixed investment, and residential investment—rose at a solid

annual rate of 2.5 percent in the first quarter, somewhat below the rate observed last year but

Consumer spending growth has eased this year

After rising at the robust rate of about 3 percent in 2023 and 2024, growth in consumer spending

adjusted for inflation slowed in the first quarter of this year to a modest pace of around 1 percent

year in 2023 and 2024. The ratio of household wealth relative to income remains high and has

ence between current income and spending, as a share of income—remains somewhat below its

Figure 20. Change in real personal 
consumption expenditures

Note: The data extend through April 2025.

According to surveys, concerns over adverse

Figure 22. Indexes of consumer sentiment

consumers, as the frequency of references

Michigan survey (right scale)
Conference Board (left scale)

to tariff-driven inflation and expectations of

slower job growth have risen notably this year,

magnitudes of decline in the headline meas­

ures have differed across surveys. Moreover,