# South Africa Economic Update

Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

South Africa Economic Update, Edition 15
Learning: 
Overdue Reforms 
and Emerging Priorities 
in Basic Education

© 2025 The World Bank 
1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433 
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org 
 
Some rights reserved. 
 
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed 
in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments 
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The 
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any 
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or 
acceptance of such boundaries. 
 
Rights and Permissions 
 
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its 
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution 
to this work is given. 
 
Attribution—Please cite the work as follows: “World Bank (2025) South Africa Economic Update. Learning: Overdue 
Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education © World Bank.”

Adaptations—If you create an adaptation of this work, please add the following disclaimer along with the attribution: 
This is an adaptation of an original work by The World Bank. Views and opinions expressed in the adaptation are 
the sole responsibility of the author or authors of the adaptation and are not endorsed by The World Bank.

Third-party content—The World Bank does not necessarily own each component of the content contained within 
the work. The World Bank therefore does not warrant that the use of any third-party owned individual component 
or part contained in the work will not infringe on the rights of those third parties. The risk of claims resulting from 
such infringement rests solely with you. If you wish to re-use a component of the work, it is your responsibility to 
determine whether permission is needed for that re-use and to obtain permission from the copyright owner. 
Examples of components can include, but are not limited to, tables, figures, or images.
 
All queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, 
The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; 
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

(i) Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

PART 2: THE OVERDUE REFORM AND EMERGING PRIORITIES IN THE BASIC EDUCATION SECTOR

2.1 
THREE KEY CHALLENGES IN BASIC EDUCATION

2.1.1 
Challenge 1: The learning crisis - early progress, setbacks, and the urgency to accelerate progress

2.1.2 
Challenge 2: The increasing financing constraint of the State

2.1.3 
Challenge 3: Limited efficiency and equity of public spending on basic education

Annex 2: Key lessons from the Sobral experience in Brazil

(ii)
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 1: Weak GDP growth and declining GDP per capita

Figure 2: GDP has underperformed all other income groups since 2016

Figure 3: Financial services were the pillar of growth in recent quarters

Figure 5: Rail freight volumes have declined significantly

Figure 6: Unemployment remains elevated, with most job seekers unable to find work in over a year

Figure 7: South Africa has one of the lowest employment ratios in the world

Figure 10: The persistently wide fiscal deficit and rising public debt over time

Figure 13: The gap in labor productivity between South Africa and the world is widening in all sectors, 2001-2017

Figure 14: Contributing factors to productivity in South Africa

Figure 16: Results from International Assessments by South Africa, 2000-23

Figure 17: Comparing the System Test Scores and School-based Assessment Scores, Western Cape, 2022

Figure 18: South Africa budgetary allocation to the education sector

Figure 19: Real spending on basic education has declined since 2019-20

Figure 20: On average, provinces allocate 41 percent of their budget to education, 2023-24

Figure 21: Variations in public spending per learner in Grades 1-12 across provinces

Figure 22: Provinces spend on average, almost 75 percent of their education budget on wages

Figure 26: Reading benchmarks in Nguni languages

Box 2: Measuring inequalities in learning outcomes

Box 5: US Charter Schools, Colombian Concession Schools, and UK Academies

(iii) Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

The South Africa Economic Updates aim to contribute 
to policy debates in South Africa and beyond by 
providing independent, rigorous, and timely analysis 
connecting South Africa with global developments 
while also helping benchmark the country against 
international trends. Its stakeholders include the 
government, academia, and the media, as well as 
international partners and the wider population 
interested in South Africa’s economic development. 
Each edition of the Economic Update includes a section 
on recent economic developments and the country’s 
outlook and a special focus section discussing an 
issue pertinent to its development trajectory. In this 
edition, the focus section analyzes the challenges 
faced by the education sector and discusses policy 
options to address them.

and representatives of the National Treasury provided 
invaluable feedback on Part 2 of the report. The report 
also benefited from feedback from Nic Spaull (Senior 
Program Officer, Gates Foundation), Martin Gustafsson 
(Researcher with the Department of Economics, 
Stellenbosch University and Advisor to the Department 
of Basic Education), Servaas van der Berg (Professor 
of Economics, Stellenbosch University and South 
African National Research Chair in the Economics of 
Social Policy), Mastoera Sadan (Chief Sector Expert: 
Social, Department of Planning, Monitoring and 
Evaluation, South Africa) Carol Nuga Deliwe (Director 
of Impact, Mastercard Foundation), and Carien Vorster 
(Regional Representative, Roger Federer Foundation). 
Lavinia Engelbrecht provided communication and 
dissemination support. Emeline Umeh provided 
administrative and logistical support.

This economic update was prepared by a team led by 
Irineu Evangelista De Carvalho Filho (Senior Economist) 
and Jacques Morisset (Lead Economist and Program 
Leader). The team included Dumisani Ngwenya 
(Economist), who contributed to Part 1 of the report. 
The main authors for Part 2 of the report were Elizabeth 
Ninan Dulvy (Program Leader) and Luis Crouch (Senior 
Economist Emeritus, Research Triangle Institute), with 
inputs from Harry Patrinos (Chair in Education Policy 
at the University of Arkansas), Mamy Rakotomalala 
(Education Consultant), Alasdair Fraser (Education 
Consultant), Jesal Kika-Mistry (Education Consultant), 
Javier Baez (Lead Economist), Samira Towfighian (Senior 
Education Specialist), and Yevgeniya Savchenko (Senior 
Economist). The National Department of Basic 
Education, some provincial education departments,

We thank Pedro Miguel Gaspar Martins (Program 
Leader) and Toby Linden (Lead Economist) who were 
the peer reviewers.

The report was prepared under the overall guidance 
and supervision of Satu Kahkonen (Country Director), 
Hassan Zaman (Regional Director for Prosperity), Daniel 
Dulitzky (Regional Director for People), Marco Hernandez 
(Practice Manager for Economic Policy), and Meskerem 
Mulatu (Practice Manager for Education).

The report was edited by Lucy Victoria Davis. Aashna 
Ameen provided the cover illustration. Typesetting 
and design by Emma Fae Visser.

Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

NAEP 
National Assessment of Education Performance

NSSF 
Norms and Standards for School Funding

OECD 
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

PIRLS 
Progress in International Reading Literacy Study

PSET 
Post-Secondary Education and Training

TIMSS 
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study

Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

This report is divided into two parts. The first assesses 
the state of the South African economy, analyzing the 
latest developments and sharing the short to medium-
term outlook and risks, including a set of policy actions 
for faster and more inclusive growth. The second part 
discusses how the country can improve its human 
capital through a comprehensive reform of its basic 
education system.

Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

The overdue reform and emerging 
priorities in the basic education 
sector

For two decades following the end of apartheid, South 
Africa succeeded in increasing access to basic education 
for almost all children and started to correct some of 
the deeply entrenched inequalities from the apartheid 
era. By 2000, gross enrollment ratios averaged over 100 
percent for primary schooling and over 70 percent for 
secondary schooling, with girls’ participation rate being 
one of the highest on the continent. The country also 
made excellent progress in learning, with consistent 
improvements in math, reading, and science scores. 
Although starting from a low level, these scores were 
getting closer to the ‘low’ international benchmarks 
on learning set for OECD (Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development) countries.

• The learning crisis. Progress in learning began to 
stall around 2016, and it deteriorated further with 
the COVID-19 pandemic-related school closures. 
For example, the percentage of Grade 4 learners 
who could not properly understand what they were 
reading increased from 78 to 81 percent between 
2016 and 2021. Inequalities in learning by income, 
race, and gender persisted, with learners in the 
wealthiest 10 percent of schools being 10 times 
more likely to be able to read than those in the 
poorest 70 percent of schools. Beyond income

04 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

• The increasing financing constraint faced by the 
sector. Traditionally, South Africa’s government 
spends about 4.3 percent of GDP on basic education, 
which is higher than what most upper-middle-
income countries (UMICs) spend but lower than 
UMICs which have high levels of inequality. The 
current financing model is under threat due to the 
reduced fiscal space faced by the central 
government and competing priorities for public 
spending. Total spending in basic education declined 
in real terms from R338 billion to R323 billion in 
the last five years. Many provinces are left to either 
cut teaching posts or reduce spending on the agreed 
per-learning allocation as per the Norms and 
Standards for School Funding (NSSF). Meanwhile, 
there is pressure for the education system to 
continue to expand to accommodate an additional 
1.2 million learners by 2030, which would require 
an additional 20,000 classrooms and the hiring of 
25,000 new teachers.

To contribute to policy discussions on how to address 
the current learning crisis in South Africa, this report 
proposes three mutually reinforcing solutions.

05
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

07
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

1.1.1 Domestic conditions gradually improved during 2024, but GDP growth remains subdued

Following a short rebound after the COVID-19 crisis, South Africa returned to its low growth trajectory in the 
past two years. The economy grew by an estimated 0.8 percent in 2024, which is only slightly better than in 2023 
(Figure 1). Such performance was also modest compared to other middle-income economies and most regions in 
the world (Figure 2). In 2024, low dynamism affected all domestic sectors except for a few modern services 
(finance, real estate, and business services). However, agriculture suffered the most, with an estimated contraction 
of 16 percent, as adverse weather conditions affected crop output (Figure 3). Although agriculture accounts for 
only 2 percent of GDP, its poor performance hindered the country’s overall economic recovery since the non-
agricultural GDP growth is estimated at around 1.1 percent in 2024. On the demand side, both household consumption 
and (net) exports positively contributed to growth, but domestic investment contracted by about 3 percent 
between 2023 and 2024 (Figure 4).

South Africa’s financial markets reacted positively to the successful political transition in June and the 
elimination of load shedding since March. The Rand appreciated by 10 percent between end-May and end-
September 2024, and the stock market value increased by 12.8 percent over the same period. In early November, 
one rating agency, Standard & Poor’s, upgraded the country’s credit rating outlook from stable to positive.

Figure 1: Weak GDP growth led to declining GDP per capita

Figure 2: GDP has underperformed all other income groups

High income
Lower middle income
Upper middle income

Source: Statistics South Africa, World Bank

Figure 8: Larger goods trade surplus kept the current

Figure 9: FDI flows to South Africa remain weak compared

2019Q1
2019Q2
2019Q3
2019Q4
2020Q1
2020Q2
2020Q3
2020Q4
2021Q1
2021Q2
2021Q3
2021Q4
2022Q1
2022Q2
2022Q3
2022Q4
2023Q1
2023Q2
2023Q3
2023Q4
2024Q1
2024Q2

Brazil 
Mexico 
Middle income 
South Africa

Trade in goods (s.a.a) 
Primary income 
Current acccount

Source: South African Reserve Bank, World Bank

Figure 10: The persistently wide fiscal deficit and rising

Figure 11: What drove the deterioration of fiscal deficit in

(Annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)

2027 f
2026 f
2025 f
2024 e
2023 
2022
2021

2.0
1.9
1.8
0.8
0.7
1.9
5.0
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices

1.9
1.9
2.1
0.9
0.7
2.5
6.2
Private Consumption

1.2
0.4
0.0
0.8
1.9
0.6
0.6
Government Consumption

4.5
4.9
5.1
-3.7
3.9
4.8
-0.4
Gross Fixed Capital Formation

3.2
3.7
4.7
-2.9
3.7
6.8
9.7
Exports, Goods and Services

3.4
4.3
5.8
-6.1
3.9
15.0
9.6
Imports, Goods and Services

2.0
1.9
1.8
0.8
0.7
1.9
4.7
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices

2.0
3.5
12.7
-16.0
-4.8
2.0
5.6
Agriculture

4.5
4.5
4.2
4.4
6.0
6.9
4.5
Inflation (Consumer Price Index)

-2.3
-2.2
-2.1
-1.2
-1.6
-0.5
3.7
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)

-4.6
-4.7
-5.9
-6.0
-5.5
-3.6
-4.6
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)

0.8
0.6
-0.6
-0.7
-0.5
0.9
-0.4
Primary Balance (% of GDP)

78.3
78.0
76.9
74.9
74.1
70.5
67.6
Debt (% of GDP)

Source: National Treasury, World Bank.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.

14 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

15
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Box 1: Why is fiscal consolidation a priority for South Africa?

Figure B1: South Africa’s debt dynamics are

Figure B2: Without fiscal consolidation, there are

significant risks of debt non-stabilization

Baseline
With historical primary balance
Nominal GDP growth

Source: National Treasury, World Bank
Source: National Treasury, World Bank

16 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

World Bank (2023a).
World Bank (2023b).
11
12

17
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

1.3 
THREE POLICY ACTIONS FOR FASTER AND MORE INCLUSIVE 
 
ECONOMIC GROWTH

Figure 12: South Africa is on the wrong side of productivity

Figure 13: The gap in labor productivity between South Africa

and the world is widening in all sectors, 2001-2017

Contributions to growth, percentage points

Labor productivity gap between world and

Capital Stock 
Total Factor Productivity 
Labor
Real GDP

Note: Solow growth decomposition. Source: Authors using data 
from the WDI database.

Source: Authors using data from the WDI database.

1.3.1 Action 1: Addressing the infrastructure constraints

18 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

1.3.2 Action 2: Improving the efficiency of public spending

19
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

For further details, see the first policy note of World Bank (2025). 
19

20 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

1.3.3 Action 3: Strengthening human capital

For a description of the complexity of the incentive schemes, see the guide prepared by the Department of Trade, Industry and Commerce: http://www.investsa.
gov.za/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/PRINT-Incentives_compressed.pdf 
This centralization was announced in the 2024 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement,
As of 2023, provinces and municipalities had to deal with more than 42 different grants (24 for the provinces and 18 for the municipalities). Many grants have 
overlapping purposes, and some are for relatively small amounts (12 grants provided less than $25 million a year to all subnational gov¬ernments).
Romer (1990).
Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001).
World Government Summit (2024). https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/m1/en/ideation-center/ic-research/2024/potential-productivity-index.html#country-scorecard

21
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 14: Contributing factors to productivity in South

Figure 15: South Africa’s HCI is low relative to its spending

Education and health spending (% of GDP)

Source: Adapted from Global Alliance Summit, 2024

The second part of this Economic Update focuses on policies to improve the efficiency of the basic education sector 
in South Africa, which is required to boost the accumulation of human capital and generate inclusive growth.

22 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Akkari, A. (2022). Early childhood education in Africa: Between overambitious global objectives, the need to reflect 
local interests, and educational choices. Prospects. Aug 8;52(1-2):7–19. doi:10.1007/s11125-022-09608-7.

Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti (2001). Productivity Differences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.

N. Batini, L. Eyraud, L. Forni, and A. Weber, (2014), “Fiscal Multipliers: Size, Determinants, and Use in Macroeconomic 
Projections,” Technical Notes and Manuals, Fiscal Affairs Department, International Monetary Fund, September.

Hanushek, E. A. and L. Woessmann, (2012). Do better schools lead to more growth? Cognitive skills, economic 
outcomes, and causation, Journal of Economic Growth 17:267–321.

R. Hausman R., F. Sturzenegger, P. Goldstein, F. Muci, D. Barrios. (2022). “Macroeconomic risks after a decade of 
microeconomic turbulence: South Africa (2007-2020),” WIDER Working Paper Series wp-2022-3, World Institute 
for Development Economic Research (UNU-WIDER).

Hausmann, R. (2023). Growth through Inclusion, Harvard Laboratory.

International Monetary Fund (2015), “Policy Paper on Fiscal Policy and Long-Term Growth,” June

Leibbrandt et al (2010). Trends in South African Income Distribution and Poverty since the Fall of Apartheid, OECD 
Working Paper, May.

Romer, P. (1990). Human Capital and Growth: Theory and Evidence. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on 
Public Policy, Volume 32, Spring 1990, Pages 251-286.

T.J. Van Resburg, S. de Jager, and K. Makrelov (2021), “Fiscal Multipliers in South Africa after the Global Financial 
Crisis, SARB Working Paper, South African Reserve Bank, WP/21/07.,

World Bank (2023a). South Africa: Climate and Development Report.

World Bank (2023b). South Africa’s Economic Update: The Cost of Insecurity.

World Bank (2025, forthcoming), Driving inclusive growth in South Africa, including four policy notes: (i) improving 
the impact of public spending on inclusive growth; (ii) delivering efficient and climate-friendly infrastructure; (iii) 
making cities an engine of inclusive growth; and (iv) injecting dynamism to the private sector.

World Bank (2025), Estimating the impacts of infrastructure reforms on economic growth and jobs in South 
Africa, draft.

World Government Summit (2024), In search of Productivity: The next 50 trillion in the global economy.

23
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

PART 2: 
The overdue reform and 
emerging priorities in the 
basic education sector

25
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

2.1 
THREE KEY CHALLENGES IN BASIC EDUCATION

2.1.1 Challenge 1: The learning crisis - early progress, setbacks, and the urgency to accelerate progress

Improvements in education outcomes must be set against the backdrop of the deep-rooted racial and spatial 
inequalities that the South African government inherited in 1994. In the two decades that followed the end of 
apartheid, South Africa made significant progress in unifying a divided education system. In 1994, public spending 
per child was 4.5 times higher for white learners than for black learners, however, by the year 2000, the expenditure 
was close to being equal. The education budget increased significantly (largely driven by the equalization of pay 
between black and white teachers), and by this time, South Africa was amongst the few countries in the world 
spending 6 percent of its GDP on the overall education system. It is also important to note that South Africa is a 
deeply multilingual society, and the issue of language of instruction and home language was explicitly minimized 
during apartheid. Recovering from this history has been difficult, but much progress has been made, as discussed 
further in this report.

By the early 2000s, South Africa had one of the highest enrollment rates in the Africa region, with more than 
12 million learners attending schools. The gross enrollment ratios averaged over 100 percent for primary schooling 
and over 70 percent for secondary schools, and girls’ participation rate was one of the highest on the continent. 
Concurrently, to improve the quality of schooling and benchmark its performance with other countries, South 
Africa began participating in international learning assessments such as the Trends in International Mathematics 
and Science Study (TIMSS)27 and the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).28 South Africa’s 
commitment to participating in these assessments emphasizes its ambition and courage to benchmark its learning 
outcomes against mostly OECD countries and other upper-middle-income countries. Between 2000 and 2016, 
South Africa achieved sustained progress in these assessments (Figure 16).29

TIMSS measures learning performance in mathematics and science for Grade 4 and Grade 8 learners every four years. In South Africa, these assessments are 
done in Grade 5 and Grade 9. The first assessment was completed in South Africa in 1995. 
PIRLS measures learning performance in reading in all official languages in Grade 4 every five years and is benchmarked in Grade 5 or Grade 6 in one or more of 
these languages - English, Afrikaans or Zulu. The first assessment was completed in South Africa in 2006. 
Both TIMSS and PIRLS measure performance by discrete international benchmarks, where the minimum points required to achieve each benchmark are the same 
across the assessments, but the interpretation of these scales vary by assessment, subject and grade level. For example, a learner achieving the low international 
benchmark (400-474 points) in the Grade 4 PIRLS reading assessment can read to locate and retrieve explicit information; whereas a learner at the low international 
benchmark in the TIMSS Grade 5 mathematics assessment can show and apply basic mathematical knowledge to solve problems.

26 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 16: Results from International Assessments by South Africa, 2000-23

International Test Score Trends in Maths, Science and Reading

2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024

Gr 5 TIMSS Math
Gr 9 TIMSS Math
Gr 9 TIMSS Science
Gr 5 TIMSS Science
Gr 4 TIMSS Reading

Source: Gustafsson and Taylor (2022), updated by authors.

The PIRLS 2021 ‘low benchmark’ is that students can locate and retrieve explicitly stated information, actions, or ideas from a simple text. 
The TIMMS 2019 ‘low benchmark’ indicates that students possess basic mathematical skills, including the ability to add, subtract, multiply, and divide one- and 
two-digit numbers, among others.

27
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Box 2: Measuring inequalities in learning outcomes

Figure B3: Learning outcomes are the most unequal in South Africa

The other 4 developing economies in PIRLS 2021

Source: Calculated by the authors from downloaded PIRLS 2021 Grade 4 data.

28 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

2.1.2 Challenge 2: The increasing financing constraint of the State

South Africa’s strong commitment to education (basic and higher education) is apparent in the significant 
share of budgetary resources allocated to this sector every year, over 6 percent of GDP (Figure 18). This is 
higher than the average for upper-middle-income countries (4 percent of GDP in 2018) but comparable or even 
lower than in other countries that also suffer huge inequalities, such as Brazil (6.1 percent of GDP in 2018) or 
Botswana (8.1 percent in 2021). The significant level of public spending on education is justified because it helps 
to support many poor and vulnerable households in accessing educational services. This includes initiatives such 
as school fee exemption, school meal programs, subsidized school transportation, and assistance with learning 
materials. On basic education alone, South Africa is estimated to spend 4.3 percent of GDP in 2024-25, less 
than that spent by Botswana and Brazil on basic education at 5.1 percent in 2019 and 4.5 percent in 2021 of 
GDP, respectively.

To prevent double counting, conditional grants were not included on the DBE side. PEDs refers to Provincial Education Departments. 
34

29
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 18: South Africa budgetary allocation to the 
education sector

Figure 19: Real spending on basic education has declined 
since 2019-20

Basic educ. & ECD
Total educ. spending
Basic DBE
Basic PEDs
Total Education

Source: Author’s calculations from National Treasury (2024), Estimates 
of Provincial Expenditure include post-secondary education and 
training and pre-Grade R ECD from 2018-19.

Source: Author’s calculations from National Treasury (2024), Estimates 
of Provincial Expenditure (EPRE), Values for 2024-25 are budgeted 
amounts.

Conditional grants are allocated for the purpose of achieving particular national government policy objectives and have conditions attached with regards to 
what it can be spent on and how it must be reported on.
35

30 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 20: On average, provinces allocate 41 percent of 
their budget to education, 2023-24

Figure 21: Variations in public spending per learner in Grades 
1-12 across provinces

Source: Author’s calculations from Estimates of Provincial Expenditure 
(EPRE).

Source: Author’s calculations from National Treasury (2024), Estimates 
of Provincial Expenditure (EPRE). Unit costs exclude costs for ECD/
Grade R, subsidies for independent schools, and subsidies for special 
needs education. It includes all other spending at the national and 
provincial level related to wages, recurrent non-wage, and development.

On average, provinces allocated a little more than 75 percent of their education budgets to teacher and 
administrative staff wages, close to 20 percent to recurrent non-wage expenditure, and less than 4 percent 
allocated to development expenditures such as school infrastructure (Figure 22). The 20 percent recurrent 
non-wage expenditure includes teaching and learning materials, school meals, transport subsidies, subsidies for 
learners with special needs, subsidies for independent schools, and other operating expenses and is expected to 
be allocated to each learner equitably through the Norms and Standards for School Funding (NSSF), which is not 
fully achieving its goal of improving equity in financing. Box 3 provides more information on the NSSF.

Box 3: Explaining the Norms and Standards for School Funding (NSSF)

The main pro-poor, financing redistribution mechanism used by the government is the Norms and 
Standards for School Funding (NSSF), which was established in 1996 and came into effect in 2007. 
This mechanism classifies schools in five categories (from the poorest (Quintile 1 (Q1) schools) to 
the richest (Quintile 5 (Q5) schools)) and then allocates funding proportionally. For example, in 
2023, the minimum threshold amount per learner was set at R1602 annually for learners in poorer 
Q1-Q3 schools and R803 and R277 for learners in Q4 and Q5 schools respectively. Q1-Q3 schools 
are ‘no-fee’ schools and cannot charge fees to parents while Q4-Q5 schools can charge fees.

31
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 22: Provinces spend, on average, about 75 percent of their education budget

Recurrent Wage
Recurrent Non-Wage
Development spending

Source: Authors calculations from Estimates of Provincial Expenditure (EPRE). Numbers are rounded 
to the nearest integer.

Box 4: How are wages negotiated in the education sector?

In South Africa, teacher salaries are negotiated centrally- along with the salaries for rest of the 
public service- between national government and all recognized public sector unions (teachers, 
police, health, and others). National government is represented in these negotiations by the 
Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA) and National Treasury (NT), and the 
government’s position is informed by a mandating committee, which includes Cabinet and Provincial 
Premiers. However, the burden of paying wages is the responsibility of the provincial Treasuries 
and the provincial Departments of Education.

32 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

2.1.3 Challenge 3: Limited efficiency and equity of public spending on basic education

Figure 23: South Africa’s underperformance: Expected vs actual PIRLS 2021 Grade 4 scores

PIRLS 2021 Grade 4 w.o. inequality
PIRLS 2021 Grade 4 with inequality

350
400
450
500
550
600
650
350
400
450
500
550
600
650

Expected PIRLS Score
Expected PIRLS Score

Source: Analysis by authors from downloaded PIRLS data and World Bank data on GDP per capita, education expenditure, and the Gini coefficient. 
SA 4 refers to the grade 4 assessment, and SA 6 to the grade 6 assessment.

33
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

The QMS replaced the Integrated Quality Management System (IQMS), which was initiated in 2005.
Taylor (2017)
L. Darling-Hammond (1989). 
World Bank (2023)
Data on center-based early learning services are more readily available but the Thrive by Five Index, which measures child outcomes for 4 to 5-year-old children, 
has only been collected once to date.

34 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 24: The differences in spending per learner are not always corrected by public funding, results for one province 
in 2021-22

Household fees
Public Spending: Non-wage recurrent
Public Spending: Wages

Quintile 1 to 3
Quintile 1 to 3
No fee quintile 4 to 5
No fee quintile 4 to 5
Fee-charging 
quintile 4 to 5

Source: Data collected from one province in South Africa

35
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

36 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Figure 25: Reforming the education system: from challenges to recommended actions

• 
81% of Grade 4 learners cannot 
read for meaning
• 
Grade 5 mathematics outcomes 
declining
• 
High levels of inequality
• 
No professional standards for 
teaching
• 
No regular national learning 
assessment

• 
Declining education spending in 
real terms 
• 
Spending shift in favor of post-
secondary education and training
• 
Public spending on education 
under threat-economic slowdown 
and competing priorities

Young Lives is a longitudinal study of poverty and inequality that has been following the lives of 12,000 children in Ethiopia, India (Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana), Peru and Vietnam since 2001.
42

Structured pedagogy is a package of well-organized interventions that work together to change instructional practice.
The reason for the superiority of direct instruction in certain subjects has to do with their inherent nature: they are based on well-defined concepts (e.g., mass, 
force, speed, acceleration, in physics) whose relationships amongst each other must be completely mastered; they are highly sequential (difficult to study 
calculus if you do not dominate algebra); and there is a mutual dependence between practice-based skilling and conceptual understanding. 
The reader may find the analogy of a zip in clothing useful: a set of vertical locking teeth where all the teeth must interlock for the whole tool to be ideally effective, 
and where if none interlock the tool is not at all effective. The two sides of the zip would be, say, curriculum and assessment. But in education the zip is ideally 
multi-dimensional: curriculum, scripted lesson plans, books, effective pedagogy, assessment, coaching, and sufficient instructional time.

South Africa is not alone in its fiscal difficulties while facing the need to deliver improved education services 
to a growing learner population. Globally, many governments have addressed this fiscal pressure by strengthening 
partnerships with the private sector. Today, 19 and 27 percent of primary and secondary school enrollments 
worldwide are private. Among upper-middle-income countries, there is more of a range; for example, private 
secondary enrollments are at 25 percent in Argentina, 15 percent in China, 10 percent in Georgia, and 7 percent 
in Turkey with private schools serving a large array of households, from extremely low-income to the rich.

Box 5: US Charter Schools, Colombian Concession Schools, and UK Academies

The charter school model, which has been widely implemented in the US, is a publicly funded 
school that is typically governed by an independent organization under a legislative contract with 
the government. The charter exempts them from certain regulations and assigns them the 
responsibility over several tasks, including management, training, supervision, monitoring, and 
maintenance, among others. In return for higher flexibility and autonomy, charter schools agree 
to meet specific accountability standards and follow state policies. The performance of PPP varies 
by the type of charter school, operator, authorizer, and organizational and instructional conditions 
under which they operate. The no-excuses model is often cited as innovative and successful because 
it targets disadvantaged and minority students and is characterized by frequent teacher feedback, 
data-driven instruction, high-dosage tutoring, increased instructional time, and high expectations. 
No excuses charter schools exhibit higher achievement in mathematics and literacy contributing 
to the reduction of the achievement gap.

45
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Education Management Information System 
(EMIS):

• National Senior Certificate (NSC)
• South African Systemic Evaluation (SASE)
• TIMSS, PIRLS, SEACMEQ

• South African School Administration and 
Management System (SA-SAMS)
• SNAP Survey for Ordinary Schools
• Annual Survey of Schools
• Learner Unit Record Information and 
Tracking System (LURITS)
• Centralized Education Management 
Information System (CEMIS)

• Quality Management System (QMS)
• Education Facility Management System 
(EFMS)
• Personal and Salary System (PERSAL)

• School Monitoring Survey
• Teaching and Learning Survey (TALIS)

46 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Key lessons from the Sobral experience in Brazil

Degree of implementation in South Africa
Measure

Ensure at least the basic material conditions in terms 
of spending, targeting of resources.

47
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Degree of implementation in South Africa
Measure

Use of the measurement system to allocate support 
for schools.

Teacher support via some form of coaching or school-
based instructional leadership.

Sources: Crouch (2020), Cruz and Loureiro (2020), Loureiro, Cruz, Ildo and Evans (2020)

48 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

49
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Akkari, A. (2022). Early childhood education in Africa: Between overambitious global objectives, the need to reflect 
local interests, and educational choices. Prospects. Aug 8;52(1-2):7–19. doi:10.1007/s11125-022-09608-7.

Angrist, N., Beatty, A., & Crossley, C. (2023) 20 for 20: The tutor is calling - Targeted instruction by phone boosts 
learning across six countries. J-PAL Blog. https://www.povertyactionlab.org/blog/5-8-23/20-20-tutor-calling-
targeted-instruction-phone-boosts-learning-across-six-countries

Bashir, S., Lockheed, M., Ninan, E. & Tan, J.P. (2018). Facing Forward Schooling for Learning in Africa. Washington, 
D.C.: The World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/e68bf6f9-8496-54f5-
a003-45505560a346/content

Bruns, B., Schneider, B.R. and Saavedra, J. (2023). The Politics of Transforming Education in Peru: 2007-2020. 
RISE Working Paper Series. 23/135. https://doi.org/10.35489/BSG-RISE-WP_2023/135

Böhmer, B. & Wills, G. (2023). COVID-19 and inequality in reading outcomes in South Africa: PIRLS 2016 and 2021. 
COVID-Generation working paper. https://resep.sun.ac.za/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/2023-12-22-Bohmer_
Wills_PIRLS_inequality.pdf

Burgess, S., Greaves, E., Vignoles, A., and Wilson, D. (2015). What parents want: School preferences and school 
choice. Economic Journal 125(587): 1262-1289.

Cooper, A., Mahali, A., de Kock, T., Radasi, Z., Mcata, and B., Soudien, C. 2021. Evaluation Prepared for the Pilot 
Support Office of the Public-School Partnerships Programme Evaluation of the Public School Partnerships (PSP) 
Pilot Programme. Human Sciences Research Council. Pretoria, South Africa.

Crawford, M., Raheel N., Korochkina, M., & Rastle, K. (2024). Inadequate foundational decoding skills constrain 
global literacy goals for pupils in low-and middle-income countries. Nature Human Behaviour, 1-10. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41562-024-02028-x

Crouch, L. & Hoadley, U. (2018). The transformation of South Africa’s system of Basic Education. In Levy at al. 
(2018).

Crouch, L. (2020). Systems Implications for Core Instructional Support Lessons from Sobral (Brazil), Puebla 
(Mexico), and Kenya. RISE Insight Series. 2020/020. https://doi.org/10.35489/BSG-RISE-RI_2020/020

Crouch, L., King, K., Olefir, A., Saeki, H. & Savrimootoo, T. (2020). Taking Preprimary Programs to Scale in Developing 
Countries: Multi-source Evidence to Improve Primary School Completion Rates. IJEC 52, 159–174. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13158-020-00271-7

Crouch, L., Rolleston, C., and Gustafsson, M. (2021). Eliminating global learning poverty: The importance of equalities 
and equity. International Journal of Educational Development. Volume 82, April 2021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijedudev.2020.102250

Cruz, L. & Loureiro, A. (2020). Achieving World-Class Education in Adverse Socioeconomic Circumstances: The 
Case of Sobral in Brazil. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/
en/143291593675433703/pdf/Achieving-World-Class-Education-in-Adverse-Socioeconomaic-Conditions-The-
Case-of-Sobral-in-Brazil.pdf

Dallavis, J.W. and Berends, M. (2023). Charter schools after three decades: Reviewing the research on school 
organizational and instructional conditions. Education Policy Analysis Archives 31.

Darling-Hammond, L. (1989). ‘Reading 8: Accountability for professional practice.’ Edited extract from Hammond, 
L. Teachers College Record, Volume 91, Number 1, Fall 1989. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University: 
1989. New York Teachers College, Columbia University: 59-67

50 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Darling-Hammond, L., Ascher, C. (1991). “Creating Accountability in Big City School Systems.” New York: Columbia 
University. Urban Diversity Series No. 102. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED334339.pdf.

Dulvy, E., N., Devercelli, A., van Der Berg, S., Gustafsson, M., Pettersson, G., Kika-Mistry, J., & Beaton-Day, F. (2023). 
South Africa Public Expenditure and Institutional Review for Early Childhood Development (ECD PEIR) (English). 
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099192001242341964/
P1756791e5e59bde1ad6714d311b6261dd284d0e6d65

Education Partnerships Group (EPG). 2022. Western Cape Education Partnership Research: Identifying success 
factors for school improvement.

Education Partnerships Group (EPG). 2021. Collaboration Schools Policy Review Process: Education Partnership 
Governance Structures.

Eyles, A., Hupkau, C., and Machin, S. (2016). Academies, charter, and free schools: do new school types deliver 
better outcomes? Economic Policy 31(87): 453-501.

Fleisch, B. (2023). Theory of Change and Theory of Education: Pedagogic and Curriculum Defects in Early Grade 
Reading Interventions in South Africa. Education as Change, 27(1), 1-14.

Fleisch, B., & Schöer, V. (2023). Storybooks in hand: A randomized control trial of a classroom library model. 
International Journal of Educational Development, 96, 102705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2022.102705

Fleisch, B., & Schӧer, V. (2024). The effects of teaching assistants on letter knowledge of foundation phase students 
in South Africa: Findings from an exploratory trial. International Journal of Educational Research Open, 7, 100383. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedro.2024.100383

Glazerman, S. and Dotter, D. (2017). Market signals: Evidence on the determinants and consequences of school 
choice from a citywide lottery. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 39(4): 593-619.

Gove, A. and P. Cvelich. (2011). Early Reading: Igniting Education for All. A report by the Early Grade Learning 
Community of Practice. Revised Edition. Research Triangle Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute.

Gustafsson, M. (2024a, 2 Jul). Achieving quality schooling for all South Africa’s learners is within our reach. Daily 
Maverick. https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2024-07-02-achieving-quality-schooling-for-all-south-africas-
learners-is-within-our-reach/

Gustafsson, M. & Nonkenge, K. (forthcoming, draft 2024b). Basic education policy: From 1994 to now. Cape Town, 
Economic Research Southern Africa.

Gustafsson, M., & Taylor, S. (2022). What lies behind South Africa’s improvements in PIRLS? An Oaxaca-Blinder 
analysis of the 2011 and 2016 data. Stellenbosch: Stellenbosch University.

Gustafsson, M. & Taylor, N. (2022). The Politics of Improving Learning Outcomes in South Africa. Research on 
Improving Systems of Education. PE03. https://doi.org/10.35489/BSG-RISE-2022/PE03

Hanushek, E., & Woessmann, L. (2012). Do Better Schools Lead to More Growth? Cognitive Skills, Economic 
Outcomes, and Causation. Journal of Economic Growth, 17(4), 267-321.

Hanushek, E, & Woessmann, L. (2015). The Knowledge Capital of Nations: Education and the Economics of Growth. 
MIT Press.

Hastings, J. & Weinstein, J. (2009). Information, School Choice, and Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two 
Experiments, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 123, Issue 4, November 2008, Pages 1373–1414, https://
doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2008.123.4.1373

51
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Hoadley, U. & Boyd, C. (2022). Early grade reading instruction in South African classrooms: 2010–2020. In Spaull, 
N. & Taylor, S. (2022). Interventions. Early Grade Reading and Mathematics Interventions in South Africa. Cape 
Town: Oxford University Press South Africa. https://www.calameo.com/oxford-university-press-south-africa/
read/006710753e7d90d4a4755

Hoadley, U. & Boyd, C. (2022). Reading Instruction in South African classrooms, 2010-2020. In: E. Pretorius and 
N. Spaull, (Eds.), (2022, forthcoming). Early grade reading and writing. Oxford University Press. ISBN: 9780190751715

Jansen, J., & Taylor, N. (2003). Educational change in South Africa 1994-2003: case studies in large-scale education 
reform.

Kanjee, A., & Moloi, Q. (2014). South African teachers’ use of national assessment data. South African Journal of 
Childhood Education, 4(2) 90-113. ISSN: 2223-7674

Kirby, S. N., & Stecher, B. (2004). Introduction. In S. N. Kirby & B. Stecher (Eds.), Organizational Improvement and 
Accountability: Lessons for Education from Other Sectors (1st ed., pp. 1–10). RAND Corporation. http://www.jstor.
org/stable/10.7249/mg136wfhf.7

Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An 
analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching. 
Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.

Klahr, D., & Nigam, M. (2004). The equivalence of learning paths in early science instruction: Effects of direct 
instruction and discovery learning. Psychological Science, 15(6), 661-667.

Le Houerou, P. & Taliercio, R. (2002). Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks: Preliminary Lessons from Africa. 
The World Bank. Africa Region Working Papers No. 28. https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/
en/720841468741912384/pdf/multi0page.pdf.

Levy, B., Cameron, R., Hoadley, U., & Naidoo, V., eds. (2018). The Politics and Governance of Basic Education 
A Tale of Two South African Provinces.

Lindblom, C.E. (1959). “The science of “muddling” through,” Public Administration Review, 19(2): 79-88.

Lopez, J., Behrman, J., Cueto, S., Favara, M. & Sánchez, A. (2024). Late-childhood foundational cognitive skills 
predict educational outcomes through adolescence and into young adulthood: Evidence from Ethiopia and Peru. 
Economics of Education Review, Volume 100, Article Number 102543.

Loureiro, A., Cruz, L., Ildo, L. & Evans, D. (2020). The State of Ceará in Brazil is a Role Model for Reducing Learning 
Poverty. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/34156 
Mayer, R. E. (2004). Should there be a three-strike rule against pure discovery learning? American Psychologist, 
59(1), 14-19.

McKay, V. & Spaull, N. (2022). Changing the ‘grammar of schooling’ in South Africa: The case of the DBE Workbooks. 
In Spaull, N. & Taylor, S. (2022).

Mohohlwane, N. L. (2016). The contribution of randomised control trials (RCTs) to improving education evaluations 
for policy: Evidence from developing countries and South African case studies (Doctoral dissertation, University 
of the Witwatersrand, Faculty of Humanities, School of Education).

Mohohlwane, N., Wills, G., & Ardington, C. (2022). A review of recent efforts to benchmarkearly reading skills in 
south African languages. In Early grade reading in South Africa (Vol. 1, pp. 83–108). Oxford University Press.

52 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Mohohlwane, N., Taylor, S., Cilliers, J., & Fleisch, B. (2023). Reading Skills Transfer Best from Home Language to 
a Second Language: Policy Lessons from Two Field Experiments in South Africa, Journal of Research on Educational 
Effectiveness, DOI: 10.1080/19345747.2023.2279123

Morgan PL, Farkas G, & Hibel J. (2008). Matthew Effects for Whom? Learning Disabilities Quarterly. Nov 1;31(4):187-
198. PMID: 26339117; PMCID: PMC4554759.

Motilal, G. & Fleisch, B. (2018). The triple cocktail programme to improve the teaching of reading: Types of 
engagement. South African Journal of Childhood Education, 10, No 1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4102/sajce.v10i1.709

Piper, B., & Dubeck, M. (2024). Responding to the learning crisis: Structured pedagogy in sub-Saharan Africa. 
International Journal of Educational Development, 109, 103095.

Piper, B. & Zuilkowski. (2015). Teacher coaching in Kenya: Examining instructional support in public and nonformal 
schools. Teaching and Teacher Education 47. 173-183.

Pritchett, L. (2001). Where has all the education gone? The World Bank Economic Review. Vol. 15, No. 3. https://
documents1.worldbank.org/curated/pt/859821468180273788/pdf/773740JRN020010l0the0Education0Gone.pdf

Qvist, J. (2023). Learning profiles and reading benchmarks: Trends from South African data on early grade reading. 
Master’s Thesis. University of the Witwatersrand.

Ramadiro, B., & Porteus, K. (2017). Foundation phase matters: Language and learning in South African rural 
classrooms. Magic Classroom Collective Press.

Sapire, I., Isaac, P., Mpofu, S., Sako, L., Seoloana, M., Ndamase, T., & Mafilika, V. (2022). The implementation of the 
Bala Wande programme in Grade 1 in three provinces: Lessons learned, in Spaull, N. & Taylor, S. (2022).

Snilstveit, B., Stevenson, J., Phillips, D., Vojtkova, M., Gallagher, E., Schmidt, T., & Eyers, J. (2015) ‘Interventions 
for improving learning outcomes and access to education in low-and middle-income countries: a systematic review.’ 
http://www.3ieimpact.org.

Spaull, N. (2016). Shaky data skews literacy results (M&G article on SACMEQ IV). https://nicspaull.com/2016/09/25/
shaky-data-skews-literacy-results-mg-article-on-sacmeq-iv/

Spaull, N. & Taylor, S. (2022). Early Grade Reading and Mathematics Interventions in South Africa: Interventions. 
Cape Town: Oxford University Press Southern Africa. https://www.calameo.com/oxford-university-press-south-
africa/read/006710753e7d90d4a4755.

Spaull, N. & Taylor, S. (2022). Impact or scale? The trade-offs of early grade reading and mathematics interventions 
in South Africa. In Spaull and Taylor (2022).

Spaull, N. & Pretorius, E. (Eds). (2022). Early Grade Reading in South Africa. Oxford University Press. ISBN: 
9780190751715

Stanovich, K. E. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: Some consequences of individual differences in the acquisition 
of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 360-407.

Stipek, D., Clements, D., Coburn, C., Franke, M. & Farran, D. PK-3: What Does It Mean for Instruction? Social Policy 
Report. Vol. 30, No. 2. Society for Research on Child Development. https://www.srcd.org/research/what-does-
pk-3-instructional-alignment-mean-policy-and-practice

Stern, J., Jukes, M., Cilliers, J., Fleisch, B., Taylor, S. & Mohohlwane, N. (2024). Persistence and Emergence of Literacy 
Skills: Long-Term Impacts of an Effective Early Grade Reading Intervention in South Africa. Journal of Research 
on Educational Effectiveness. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2024.2417288

53
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Taylor, N. (2017). ‘Towards Teacher Professional Knowledge and Practice Standards in South Africa, ‘Commissioned 
paper for Centre of Development and Enterprise. Johannesburg, South Africa. https://cde.org.za/wp-content/
uploads/2018/06/CDE-Insight-Teacher-Professional-Standards-For-South-Africa.pdf

Taylor, N. (2021). The dream of Sisyphus: Mathematics education in South Africa. South African Journal of Childhood 
Education, 11(1), 1-12. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/sajce.v11i1.911

Taylor, N., & Mawoyo, M. (2022). Professionalising teaching: The case of language and literacy. Early grade reading 
in South Africa, 164-178.

Taylor, N. (forthcoming). “School Foundations: The Role of Initial Teacher Education.” Draft. Written as part of the 
Teacher Demographic Dividend Project, managed by the Socioeconomic Policy Unit (ReSEP) at Stellenbosch 
University.

Taylor, S., & Spaull, N. (2015). Measuring access to learning over a period of increased access to schooling: The 
case of Southern and Eastern Africa since 2000. International Journal of Educational Development, 41, 47-59.

USAID and DBE. United States Agency for International Development and Department of Basic Education. (2022). 
Benchmarking Early Grade Reading Skills in South Africa: Technical Report. Setswana Home Language. https://
www.education.gov.za/Portals/0/Documents/Reports/ReadingBenchmarks22/10.%20Technical%20Report-
Setswana%20Early%20Grade%20Reading%20Benchmarks.pdf.

Van der Berg, S. (2015). What the Annual National Assessments can tell us about learning deficits over the education 
system and the school career. South African Journal of Childhood Education. 5(2): 28-43.

Van der Berg, S., Girdwood, E., Shepherd, D., van Wyk, C., Kruger, Viljoen, J., Ezeobi, O. & Ntaka, P. (2013). The 
Impact of The Introduction of Grade R On Learning Outcomes. Research on Socio-Economic Policy (RESEP). 
Department of Economics. University of Stellenbosch.

Van der Berg, S. van der, van Wyk, C., Selkirk, R., & Hofmeyr, H. (2021). Learner flows through schools: Using high 
quality administrative data to understand education system performance. Available at SSRN 4009654.

Van der Berg, S., Wills, G., Selkirk, R., Adams, C., & van Wyk, C. (2019). The cost of repetition in South Africa.

Van der Berg, S. (2021). Estimating the impact of five early childhood development programmes against a 
counterfactual. Ilifa Labantwana & ReSEP. No. ECD WP 006/2023. https://resep.sun.ac.za/wp-content/
uploads/2021/11/Estimating-the-impact-of-five-early-childhood-development-programmes-against-a-
counterfactual-V06.pdf

Van der Berg, S. (2023). The cognitive gains case for ECD: Missing pieces of the puzzle. Ilifa Labantwana & ReSEP. 
No. ECD WP 001/2021. https://ilifalabantwana.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/390-Cognitive-case-for-
ECD-v03.pdf

Van Wyk, C. (2021). Learner flow through patterns in the Western Cape using CEMIS datasets from 2007 to 2019: 
A longitudinal cohort analysis. Department of Economics, University of Stellenbosch.

Venkat, H., & Roberts, N. (2022). Children doing mathematics with confidence in the early grades by 2030: what 
will it take? In Venkat and Roberts (2022).

Venkat, H., & Roberts, N. (Eds.). (2022). Early Grade Mathematics in South Africa. Oxford University Press Southern 
Africa.

Venkat, H., & Sapire, I. (2022). Early grade mathematics in South Africa between 2000 and 2010: What did we 
know in 2010, and how did this set the stage for the 2010–2020 decade? (Vol. 2). Oxford University Press.

54 Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

Venkat, H. and Spaull, N. (2014). What do we know about primary teachers’ mathematical content knowledge in 
South Africa? An analysis of SACMEQ 2007. International Journal of Educational Development. Volume 41, March 
2015, Pages 121-130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2015.02.002

Wills, G. (2023). Early grade repetition in South Africa Implications for reading. Research on Socio-Economic Policy 
(ReSEP). University of Stellenbosch.

Wills, G., & Qvist, J. (2023). Repetition and dropout in South Africa before, during, and after COVID-19. Covid-
Generation Research Report. Stellenbosch University, RESEP.

World Bank. (2020). Cost-Effective Approaches to Improve Global Learning. https://tinyurl.com/yc4ekta4.

World Bank. (2023). Going Beyond the Infrastructure Funding Gap: A South African Perspective. Basic Education 
Report. https://www.dbsa.org/sites/default/files/media/documents/2023-08/Beyond%20the%20Gap%20-%20
Basic%20Education%20Report%20-%202023.pdf

World Bank (2024). Western Cape Education Sector Analysis. https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/
en/099091624103524415/pdf/P5021141b03f880bc1a7881909a0c8f5950.pdf

55
Learning: Overdue Reforms and Emerging Priorities in Basic Education

View this report online: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/southafrica