# ecb financial stability review 2025 05

1 
Macro-financial and credit environment 
14

1.1 
Trade tensions, policy uncertainty and geopolitical risks weigh on 
growth outlook 
14

Box 1 Cyber threats to financial stability in a complex geopolitical

1.2 
High spending needs and low growth complicate fiscal 
consolidation 
20

1.3 
Firms face higher debt service costs alongside trade tensions 
23

1.4 
Elevated savings support household resilience 
26

1.5 
Recovering real estate markets may face headwinds from 
elevated uncertainty 
28

2.1 
Financial markets have been volatile 
32

2.2 
The medium-term implications of tariffs might still challenge risky 
asset valuations 
36

Box 2 What does the record price of gold tell us about risk perceptions

2.3 
Higher inflows and the prospect of fiscal expansion could support 
euro area financial markets 
43

3.1 
Bank profitability remains solid but faces headwinds 
46

Box 3 The deposit franchise value of euro area banks 
51

3.2 
Asset quality deterioration has remained contained, but credit risk 
and provisioning needs are likely to increase 
54

3.3 
Banks’ funding costs have fallen but are encountering frictions on 
their downward path 
57

Box 4 Digital banking: how new bank business models are disrupting

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Contents

3.4 
Banks maintain robust liquidity and capital buffers 
62

3.5 
Preserving bank resilience is essential in an uncertain 
environment 
64

4.1 
Trade disputes may test non-bank asset valuations 
68

4.2 
Liquidity mismatches and increasing leverage in parts of the 
investment fund sector 
70

Box 5 Examining the dynamics of liquid asset holdings in the non-bank

4.3 
Insurance and pension fund sectors remain resilient, but 
uncertainty poses risks 
75

4.4 
Enhancing the NBFI policy framework from a macroprudential 
perspective and supporting resilient capital markets 
78

Box 6 Private markets: risks and benefits from financial diversification

A 
Just another crypto boom? Mind the blind spots 
86

B 
Risks to euro area financial stability from trade tensions 
97

C 
Navigating financial stability in an ageing world 
111

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Contents

This edition of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review includes three analytical special 
features. The first analyses recent developments in crypto markets and their growing 
interconnectedness with the traditional financial sector. The second investigates risks 
to financial stability from trade tensions, while the third looks into how population 
ageing could affect financial stability in the financial and non-financial sectors.

The FSR is intended to promote awareness of systemic risks among policymakers, 
the ﬁnancial industry and the public at large, ultimately promoting financial stability. It 
has been prepared with the involvement of the ESCB Financial Stability Committee, 
which assists the decision-making bodies of the ECB in the fulﬁlment of their tasks.

Luis de Guindos, 
Vice-President of the European Central Bank

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Foreword

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Soaring policy uncertainty leads to major shifts in market 
sentiment

Geopolitical and policy uncertainty have spiked from already high levels since 
the previous edition of the Financial Stability Review was published. Just as 
uncertainties stemming from political risks within euro area countries were subsiding, 
external sources of uncertainty, notably those associated with the unpredictability of a 
broad range of US policies, have soared (Chart 1, panel a). A lack of clarity surrounds 
several important economic policy domains, including trade, regulatory and fiscal 
policies, as well as the level of commitment of the new US Administration to 
international cooperation (Chart 1, panel b). While it is hard to predict the medium to 
long-term implications of these individual layers of uncertainty, they entail a broad risk 
of geoeconomic fragmentation across the globe, in turn raising the likelihood of 
increasingly frequent and impactful adverse tail events. Although the announcements 
of trade agreements between the United States and some of its trading partners point 
towards an easing of trade tensions, concerns remain that these tensions could 
escalate into a trade war with the potential for significant adverse impacts on global 
growth, inflation and asset prices. As the euro area is a very open economy which is 
well integrated into global supply chains, vulnerabilities to these sources of risk are 
pronounced.

Chart 1 
Economic policy uncertainty has spiked in recent months, implying broad risks of 
economic, geopolitical and regulatory fragmentation across the globe

a) Economic policy 
uncertainty in Europe and the 
United States

b) Breakdown of economic 
policy uncertainty for the 
United States

c) Market volatility in equity, 
bond, foreign exchange and 
commodity markets

(Jan. 1995-Apr. 2025, indices) 
(Jan. 1985-Apr. 2025, indices) 
(1 Jan. 2024-13 May 2025, z-scores)

Sources: www.policyuncertainty.com, Baker, Bloom and Davis*, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel b: the right-hand scale refers to trade policy uncertainty. Panel c: volatilities indicated are the VIX Index for equities, the 
MOVE Index for bonds, the 30-day volatility of the Bloomberg Commodities Index for commodities and the J.P. Morgan Global FX 
Volatility Index for foreign exchange rates. 
*) Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S., “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, No 4, 
November 2016, pp. 1593-1636.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

than expected US import tariffs announced on 2 April 2025 injected significant volatility 
into financial markets (Chart 1, panel c). The prospect of slowing economic activity, 
notably for the United States (Chart 2, panel a), led to a major sell-off in riskier assets, 
with magnitudes not seen since the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. Markets 
rebounded strongly after a 90-day tariff pause was announced for most countries and 
had mostly recovered their initial losses by mid-May (Chart 2, panel b). During the 
turmoil, market functioning – which can be thought of as the ability to trade financial 
assets quickly without moving prices inordinately – in euro area financial markets held 
up well. This was despite some atypical shifts away from some traditional safe havens 
like US Treasuries and the US dollar. In part, this may have been due to technical 
factors such as investors needing to raise liquidity to meet fund redemptions or margin 
calls as market volatility rose (Chapter 4), with an unwinding of asset swap or basis 
trade positions contributing to the sell-off in US Treasuries. But these moves might 
also have reflected perceptions of a more fundamental regime change, with investors 
seeming to reassess the riskiness of US assets, possibly leading to broader shifts in 
global capital flows. This would have potentially far-reaching consequences for the 
global financial system. Meanwhile, euro area non-banks stayed resilient, with signs of 
a rotation in fund flow dynamics from the United States to the euro area (Chart 2, 
panel c).

Chart 2 
Soaring geopolitical and policy uncertainty has led to marked shifts in economic and 
financial market sentiment

a) 2025 real GDP growth 
forecasts for the euro area and 
the United States

b) EURO STOXX 50 and S&P 
500 
c) Cumulative flows into euro 
area equity funds, by region

(Jan. 2024-May 2025, percentage changes 
per annum)

(1 Jan. 2024-13 May 2025, indices: 
1 Jan. 2024 = 100) 
(2 Jan. 2024-13 May 2025, percentages of 
total net assets)

Sources: Consensus Economics Inc., Bloomberg Finance L.P., EPFR Global and ECB calculations.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Stretched valuations and declining non-bank liquidity 
make markets prone to further outsized reactions

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Chart 3 
High valuations and increasing risk concentration render equity and credit markets 
vulnerable to shocks, which could be amplified by non-bank liquidity fragilities

a) Global policy uncertainty, 
high-yield corporate bond 
issuance and spread

b) Nasdaq index and 
cumulative flows into euro 
area equity funds

c) Financial and synthetic 
leverage of euro area 
investment funds

(1 Jan. 2000-13 May 2025; index, USD 
billions, basis points)

(2 Jan. 2023-13 May 2025; index: 2 Jan. 
2023 = 100, percentages of total net assets) 
(2021, 2024; percentages of shares issued, 
percentages of total assets)

Sources: Dealogic, LSEG, Davis*, EPFR Global, Bloomberg Finance L.P., ECB (CSDB, EMIR, IVF, SFTDS) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel b: the chart refers only to euro area equity funds investing in US tech equity. Panel c: financial leverage is measured as the 
ratio of total assets to shares issued, expressed as a percentage. Synthetic leverage is proxied by the gross notional value of derivatives 
outstanding as a percentage of total assets. EA stands for euro area. 
*) Davis, S.J., “An Index of Global Economic Policy Uncertainty”, Macroeconomic Review, October 2016.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Chart 4 
Rising global trade frictions could add to credit risks in the corporate sector and 
translate into asset quality problems for banks and non-banks

a) US tariffs implemented 
against the EU, and US trade 
policy uncertainty

b) Lending to manufacturing 
industries and extra-EU goods 
export shares

c) Euro area non-banks’ 
holdings of European sectors 
exposed to US trade

(Q1 2009-Q1 2025; numbers, index) 
(Q4 2024; percentages, percentages of 
GDP)

Sources: Global Trade Alert, Baker, Bloom and Davis*, Eurostat, OECD, ECB (AnaCredit, SHS, CSDB) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel b: lending to manufacturing sectors (NACE codes C10-C35) as a share of total euro area corporate lending and extra-EU 
goods exports from euro area countries as a share of total GDP. Panel c: European US-import and US-export-reliant sectors are defined 
as those scoring above the 75th percentile in the OECD's foreign input reliance and foreign market reliance indicators respectively. Total 
securities holdings include debt securities, listed shares and investment fund units. 
*) Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S., “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, No 4, 
November 2016, pp. 1593-1636.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Chart 5 
Increased defence spending needs could exacerbate fiscal pressures for some highly 
indebted sovereigns with substantial short-term refinancing requirements

a) Defence expenditure and government debt 
service across euro area countries

b) Indebtedness of the government, corporate 
and household sectors

(2024, Mar. 2025, percentages of GDP) 
(Q1 2000-Q4 2024, percentages of GDP)

Sources: Eurostat, NATO, ECB (QSA, GFS, MNA) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: “low debt” refers to countries with debt-to-GDP ratios below 60%, “medium debt” to countries with debt-to-GDP ratios 
between 60% and 100%, and “high debt” to countries with debt-to-GDP ratios above 100%. “Government debt service due in two years” 
includes the face value of the sovereign bonds due within two years and the interest accruing on all outstanding sovereign bonds in two 
years or less as of March 2025. The chart shows only those euro area countries for which 2024 estimates of defence expenditure are 
available. Estimates of defence expenditures come from NATO, as official euro area data are not yet available for 2024 and may differ 
from NATO data due to differing classifications of defence expenditures. Panel b: non-financial corporate debt on a consolidated basis. 
The horizontal lines represent the average for the period. The grey areas show euro area recessions as defined by the Centre for 
Economic Policy Research.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Overview

1 
Macro-financial and credit environment

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.1 
Economic recovery remains uneven across countries and sectors: the outlook is 
gloomy

a) Euro area real GDP growth 
for 2024 and its components

b) PMIs for economic activity 
in the euro area

c) Private sector real GDP 
growth forecasts for 2025 and 
2026

(2024, percentages and percentage points) (Jan. 2022-Apr. 2025, indices) 
(Jan. 2024-May 2025, percentage changes 
per annum)

Sources: Eurostat, S&P Global Market Intelligence, Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics Inc. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the chart shows the year-on-year GDP growth rate for 2024 and contributions from different components. Panel b: a PMI 
value above (below) 50 implies an improvement (deterioration) in economic activity.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.2 
Trade tensions add to the downside risks to euro area growth

a) Main trading partners of the euro area 
b) Euro area current account balance with the 
United States and China

(2024, shares) 
(Q1 2014-Q4 2024, percentages of euro area GDP)

Sources: Eurostat (TRD, MNA), Eurostat and ECB (BPS) and ECB calculations. 
Note: Panel a: CA = Canada, CH = Switzerland, CN = China, EU* = non-euro area EU, UK = United Kingdom, IN = India, JP = Japan, KR 
= Republic of Korea, TR = Türkiye, US = United States.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Box 1 
 
Cyber threats to financial stability in a complex geopolitical landscape

Prepared by Benjamin Klaus and Jonas Wendelborn

State-sponsored cyberattacks primarily target state institutions and critical infrastructures 
and are mainly aimed at data theft. The principal targets of state-sponsored cyberattacks are state 
institutions such as governments and ministries, the armed forces and public administration (Chart A, 
panel c). Primary targets in critical infrastructures include the telecommunications, energy and 
financial sectors as well as defence and transport companies. In addition, other companies and social 
groups are targeted, including activists and political opposition groups and, to a lesser extent, the 
media and end users (e.g. individuals). Attacks on specific sectors (e.g. the financial industry3) tend to 
be clustered over time. There are many reasons why sovereign states engage in malicious cyber 
activities, although attacks are aimed predominantly at data theft, potentially linked to espionage. 
However, and especially in times of open conflict, the goal of sabotage and data destruction is to 
cause maximum disruption by interfering with an opponent’s military operations or by destabilising 
civilian life. Disruptive attacks can also be used to exert pressure in the hope of forcing a change in 
behaviour or political position. As such, some cyberattacks can be a part of influence campaigns 
around important elections, for instance. In addition, some cyber activities are aimed at expropriation, 
in particular via ransomware attacks or the theft of crypto-assets.

2 See, for instance, “ENISA Threat Landscape 2024”, ENISA, September 2024, or “Microsoft Digital 
Defense Report 2024”, Microsoft, October 2024.

3 See also “ENISA Threat Landscape: Finance Sector”, ENISA, February 2025.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart A 
Geopolitical tensions are increasingly accompanied by state-sponsored cyberattacks

a) Geopolitical threats and 
geopolitical acts indices

b) Cyberattacks over time, by 
threat actor type

c) State-sponsored cyberattacks, 
by target sector and incident type

(2000-25, indices) 
(2000-24, number of attacks) 
(Jan. 2000-Feb. 2025, percentages)

Sources: Caldara and Iacoviello*, EuRepoC database and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the chart shows annual averages for the monthly geopolitical threats and acts indices. For 2025 the average covers January to April. Panel b and 
c: “State/state-affiliated actor” refers to attacks conducted by nation-state actors or non-state actors for whom a state affiliation is suggested. They are the same 
attacks as those labelled “state-sponsored cyberattacks” in panel c. Panel b shows the annual numbers of cyberattacks up until 2024, while panel c only shows 
the subset of state-sponsored cyberattacks, but for the full sample period of the EuRepoC database between January 2000 and 25 February 2025. 
*) Caldara, D. and Iacoviello, M., “Measuring Geopolitical Risk”, American Economic Review, Vol. 112, No 4, April 2022, pp. 1194-1225.

4 For details of general frameworks for systemic cyber risks to financial stability, see, for example, the 
article entitled “Towards a framework for assessing systemic cyber risk”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, 
November 2022, and “Systemic cyber risk”, European Systemic Risk Board, February 2020.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart B 
Cyberattacks are predominantly deployed as geopolitical tools by a small set of autocratic states

a) Initiated cyberattacks and democracy index of 
sponsor countries

b) Cyberattacks, geopolitical risk index and 
economic policy uncertainty index

(percentage shares) 
(2008-24; left-hand scale: z-scores, right-hand scale: number)

Sources: Baker, Bloom and Davis*, Caldara and Iacoviello**, EuRepoC database, Economist Intelligence Unit, Our World in Data and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Both panels only show cyberattacks conducted by nation-state actors or non-state actors for whom a state affiliation is suggested. Panel a: the 
democracy index and classification of political regimes refers to the 2024 democracy index of the Economist Intelligence Unit. It scores countries on a scale from 
zero to ten, based on 60 indicators from the following five categories: electoral process and pluralism; functioning of government; political participation; political 
culture; and civil liberties. Initiated cyberattacks include all attacks covered by the EuRepoC database between January 2000 and 25 February 2025. Panel b: 
the main sponsors are a group of four countries; the main targets are a group of seven countries. The number of cyberattacks initiated/suffered is the sum across 
these groups. The geopolitical risk index and the economic policy uncertainty index are available for two of the main sponsoring countries. Of the main targeted 
countries, the geopolitical risk index is available for all seven, while the economic policy uncertainty index is only available for five. Indices are averaged and 
standardised for each group across the countries for which the indices are available. 
*) Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S., “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, No 4, November 2016, pp. 
1593-1636. 
**) Caldara, D. and Iacoviello, M., op. cit.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

1.2 
High spending needs and low growth complicate fiscal 
consolidation

Chart 1.3 
Euro area sovereign budgets are being challenged by geopolitical uncertainties and 
structural issues

a) Draft budgetary plans for 2025 general 
budget balances

b) Sovereign debt and defence expenditures

(percentages of GDP) 
(Q4 2024, percentages of GDP)

Sources: European Commission, Eurostat and ECB (GFS), NATO and ECB calculations. 
Note: Panel a: Spain has not submitted draft budgetary plans. The chart shows the European Commission’s autumn 2024 forecasts 
instead. France’s planned budget balance is adjusted for the announcement made by the Bayrou Government on 3 February 2025. EDP 
stands for excessive deficit procedure. Panel b: data for sovereign debt-to-GDP ratios are for Q4 2024. The chart shows only those euro 
area countries for which 2024 estimates of defence expenditure are available. Estimates of defence expenditure come from NATO, as 
official euro area data do not yet cover 2024 and may differ from NATO’s due to different classifications of defence expenditures.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.4 
Debt levels and interest costs are set to rise, while any reassessment of sovereign risk 
could increase funding costs and cause spillovers to banks and corporates

a) Euro area sovereign 
debt-to-GDP ratios, by 
indebtedness

b) Difference between yields 
on new and outstanding debt, 
and average maturity of 
outstanding debt

c) Euro area sovereign, bank 
and corporate bond yields

(Q1 2000-Q4 2024, percentages of GDP) 
(Jan. 2012-Mar. 2025; left-hand scale: 
percentage points, right-hand scale: years)

Sources: Eurostat and ECB (GFS, MNA), S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: countries are grouped based on their sovereign debt-to-GDP ratios in the fourth quarter of 2024 and resulting average 
sovereign debt-to-GDP ratios are weighted by 2024 GDP. Panel b: “Difference between yields” refers to the difference between current 
yield on outstanding debt and average yield at issuance of existing debt; “Average residual maturity” refers to the average residual 
maturity for total government debt securities. Panel c: “Sovereigns” shows the GDP-weighted average of euro area countries’ ten-year 
sovereign bond yields, “Banks” shows the yields on senior unsecured bonds in the iBoxx EUR Banks Senior Index, and “Non-financial 
corporations” shows the yields on investment-grade bonds in the iBoxx EUR Non-financials Index.

5 Initially announced as the ReArm Europe Plan. See “Press statement by President von der Leyen on the 
defence package”, European Commission, Brussels, 4 March 2025 and “Commission unveils the White 
Paper for European Defence and the ReArm Europe Plan/Readiness 2030”, European Commission, 
Brussels, 19 March 2025.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

6 See also Global Debt Report 2025, OECD Publishing, March 2025.

7 See the box entitled “Sovereign bond markets and financial stability: examining the risk to absorption 
capacity”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2023.

8 For a discussion of fiscal multipliers related to military spending, see Yesilyurt, F. and Yesilyurt, M.E., 
“Meta-analysis, military expenditures and growth”, Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 56, No 3, 2019, pp. 
352-363, and Sheremirov, V. and Spirovska, S., “Fiscal multipliers in advanced and developing countries: 
Evidence from military spending”, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 208, 2022.

9 See the “Overview”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

1.3 
Firms face higher debt service costs alongside trade 
tensions

10 See “The euro area bank lending survey – First quarter of 2025”, ECB, April 2025.

11 See the “Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area in the first quarter of 2025”, 
ECB, April 2025.

12 See the EU’s “CO₂ emission performance standards for cars and vans”, European Commission, 
undated.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.5 
Interest expenses are weighing on corporate balance sheets, despite decreasing 
leverage and improving financing conditions

a) Composite indicator of 
corporate vulnerabilities and 
contributing factors

b) Firm bankruptcies and debt 
service ratio in the euro area

(Q1 2019-Q4 2027E, z-scores) 
(Q1 2023-Q1 2025; left-hand scale: index, 
right-hand scale: percentages)

Sources: ECB (BSI, MIR), Eurostat, ICASs and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: for details on the construction of the corporate vulnerability index, see the box entitled “Assessing corporate 
vulnerabilities in the euro area”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November 2020. Positive values indicate higher vulnerability while 
negative values indicate lower vulnerability. The grey shaded area refers to the forecast. Panel b: firm insolvencies are depicted as an 
index with Q4 2019 = 100. The blue area shows the minimum-maximum range of index values across sectors: construction, trade, 
transport, accommodation and food services, information and communication, finance and real estate and professional services, 
industry excluding construction, education and health care. The debt service ratio for the non-financial corporation sector is the sum of 
the interest paid in the current and the past three quarters divided by the sum of net operating surplus and property income in the current 
and the past three quarters. Panel c: issuer-weighted rating data (yearly frequency) are obtained from in-house credit assessment 
systems (ICASs) developed by euro area national central banks; they are an important source of credit risk assessment within the 
Eurosystem collateral framework. Rating changes are reported based on the credit quality steps of the Eurosystem’s harmonised rating 
scale. “Net downgrades” is the difference between upgrades and downgrades.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.6 
Euro area companies in the manufacturing sector are the most exposed to changes in 
global trade and tariff policies

a) Share of exports and imports, by industry, and top trading 
partners of euro area countries

b) Foreign trade reliance of 
euro area economic sectors

(Dec. 2024, shares) 
(Q4 2024, risk score)

Sources: Eurostat, OECD and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: intra-euro area exports and imports not included. CH = Switzerland, CN = China, EU* = non-euro area EU, UK = United 
Kingdom, US = United States. Panel b: economic sectors are ranked using the foreign market and foreign input reliance metric (for 
detailed information on data and methodology, see the special feature entitled “Risks to euro area financial stability from trade tensions” 
in this edition of the Financial Stability Review). High values indicate high reliance on either foreign markets or inputs. The size of the 
bubbles indicates the share of gross value added in Q4 2024. High-growth sectors are defined as economic sectors with a change in 
gross value added above the median value in Q4 2024 (index: Q4 2019 = 100). Low-growth sectors are defined as economic sectors 
equal to or below the median.

13 See, for instance, the European Commission’s savings and investments union strategy, unveiled in 
March 2025; the Final Report of the High Level Forum on the Capital Markets Union, published in June 
2020; the European Commission’s communication entitled “A Competitiveness Compass for the EU”; 
and “The Future of European competitiveness”, a report compiled by Mario Draghi in September 2024 at 
the request of the European Commission.

14 See Adilbish, O.E. et al., “Europe’s Productivity Weakness: Firm-Level Roots and Remedies”, IMF 
Working Papers, No 2025/040, International Monetary Fund, February 2025.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

1.4 
Elevated savings support household resilience

Chart 1.7 
Household vulnerabilities have decreased slightly from already low levels, while 
savings remain elevated

a) Composite indicator of household 
vulnerabilities

b) Growth in nominal and real disposable 
income and saving ratio

(Q1 2000-Q4 2027E, standard deviations from long-run average) 
(Q1 2022-Q4 2024, percentages)

Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the composite indicator is based on a broad set of indicators along five dimensions: (i) debt servicing capacity (measured 
by gross interest payments-to-income ratio, saving ratio and expectation of personal financial situation); (ii) leverage (gross 
debt-to-income and gross debt-to-total assets ratios); (iii) financing (bank lending rate, short-term debt-to-long-term debt ratio, quick ratio 
(defined as current financial assets/current liabilities) and credit impulse (defined as the change in new credit issued as a share of GDP)); 
(iv) income (real income growth and income-to-GDP ratio); and (v) activity (labour participation rate and unemployment expectations). 
The indicators are standardised by transforming them into z-scores, meaning that they are converted into a common scale with a mean 
of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. Composite sub-indicators are calculated for each of the five dimensions by taking the simple arithmetic 
mean of the respective underlying z-scores of the individual indicators. Finally, the overall composite indicator is obtained by equally 
weighting the composite z-scores of the five sub-categories. Positive values indicate higher vulnerability, while negative values indicate 
lower vulnerability.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.8 
Household sentiment remains below the long-term average as rising trade frictions 
and uncertainty could affect the labour market

a) Broader sentiment and general economic 
situation over the next 12 months

(Jan. 2007-Apr. 2025, z-scores) 
(Jan. 2007-Mar. 2025, percentages)

Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, Haver Analytics, OECD, CEPR and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: indices are shown as z-scores, i.e. standard deviations from their long-term averages since 2000. The latest 
observations for indices are for April 2025. The broader sentiment index is the first principal component of a broad set of household 
surveys. Panel b: the grey areas show euro area recessions as defined by the Centre for Economic Policy Research. Dashed lines 
indicate the non-recession averages. The peak in labour hoarding during the pandemic can be explained by policy measures reducing 
the cost of labour hoarding for firms.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

15 For further information, see the box entitled “Higher profit margins have helped firms hoard labour”, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.9 
Demand for mortgages has picked up gradually in recent quarters, while investment 
and construction activity has remained weak

a) Changes in demand for housing loans in 
the euro area and contributing factors

b) Survey indicators for residential 
construction PMI and residential investment 
growth

(Q1 2020-Q2 2025, net percentages) 
(Jan. 1999-Mar. 2025; left-hand scale: net percentages and 
percentages, right-hand scale: index)

Sources: ECB, European Commission, S&P Global Market Intelligence and ECB calculations.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.10 
RRE price growth differs markedly across countries, and while lower than at the peak 
of the cycle in 2022 RRE tail risks are still elevated in some countries

a) Annual growth in RRE prices 
b) One-year forward predicted tail risk for euro 
area RRE prices

(percentages) 
(Q1 2016-Q2 2025, percentages)

Sources: ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the solid red lines around the blue bars indicate positive deviations from the long-term average of the house price/income 
ratio, signalling potential overvaluation in domestic housing markets. The long-term average is calculated from Q1 1996 to the respective 
end quarter. RRE price growth data for Q4 2024 are not available for Belgium, Cyprus and the Netherlands, so data for Q3 2024 are 
shown instead. Overall, estimates from the valuation models are subject to considerable uncertainty and should be interpreted with 
caution. Alternative valuation measures may point to lower/higher estimates of overvaluation. EA stands for euro area. Panel b: the chart 
shows the results obtained from an RRE price-at-risk model based on a panel quantile regression on a sample of 19 euro area countries. 
The chart shows the fifth percentile of the predicted RRE price growth for the euro area aggregate and the 10-90th percentile range of 
this estimate across individual euro area countries. For further details, see the article entitled “The analytical toolkit for the assessment of 
residential real estate vulnerabilities”, Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 19, ECB, October 2022.

16 See the box entitled “Rents or rates: what is driving the commercial real estate market?”, Financial 
Stability Review, ECB, November 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

Chart 1.11 
Investor sentiment in CRE markets has strengthened significantly, although office 
markets may continue to face structural challenges

a) CRE investors reporting end of market 
downturn, improving credit conditions and 
less overvaluation

b) Office markets with falling capital values 
and rising vacancy rates

(Q1 2016-Q1 2025, percentages of investors surveyed) 
(Q4 2019-Q1 2025; x-axis: percentages, y-axis: percentage points)

Sources: RICS, JLL and ECB calculations. 
Note: Panel b: the dots represent national aggregates based on the prime office market in major cities. Simple averages are applied 
where data are available for more than one city.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

2.1 
Financial markets have been volatile

The announcement of significantly higher than expected US import tariffs on 2 
April led to a sharp increase in market volatility and a sell-off in risky assets. 
Increasing trade tensions following the US tariff announcement on 2 April 2025 and 
subsequent retaliation by China led to a broad-based sell-off in risky assets 
(Chart 2.1, panel a). This came to a halt when the US Administration announced a 
90-day tariff pause for most countries which was followed by a strong rebound in risky 
assets. The S&P 500 climbed 9.5% on 9 April, its highest gain since 2008, and euro

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.1 
Market pricing has become highly sensitive to tariff-related news, while the US dollar 
and US Treasuries have not performed in line with other safe-haven assets

c) Safe-haven returns during 
market stress

(2 Apr.-13 May 2025, percentages) 
(1 Jan. 2024-9 May 2025, percentages) 
(2 Jan. 1990-13 May 2025; left graph: 
percentages, right graph: basis points)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: day of 90-day pause announcement varies for different asset classes, depending on market opening hours. EA stands 
for euro area; HY stands for high-yield; IG stands for investment-grade; “corp.” stands for corporate bonds. Panel b: number of news 
articles published on Bloomberg and tagged by Bloomberg with fiscal policy, monetary policy or tariffs. Expressed as a share of total 
number of articles on the three topics. Panel c: US 10Y SB and DE 10Y SB is the respective ten-year sovereign bond yield. Distribution 
across market developments on days with highly negative returns of the S&P 500 since 1990, defined as returns that are 2 standard 
deviations below the average. Yellow dots are the average exchange rate or yield changes between the announcement of the tariffs on 2 
April and the announcement of the 90-day pause.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.2 
Market volatility spiked in April, but has since returned to subdued levels

a) Implied volatility, by asset class 
b) Implied equity and corporate bond market 
volatilities in the euro area

(current z-score vs ten-year history) 
(5 Jan. 2015-13 May 2025, index points)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: HY stands for high-yield; IG stands for investment-grade; EA stands for euro area; Panel a: “Last FSR publication date” refers to 
20 November 2024.

17 For a more detailed discussion of basis trades, see the box entitled “Financial stability risks from basis 
trades in the US Treasury and euro area government bond markets”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, 
May 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.3 
Market conditions in euro area bond markets have remained orderly, as the decline in 
market liquidity was limited and short-lived

a) Composite liquidity indicator for euro area 
corporate bond markets

b) Composite liquidity indicator for euro area 
sovereign bond markets

(1 Jan. 2024-13 May 2025, z-scores) 
(1 Jan. 2024-13 May 2025, z-scores)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Euro MTS Ltd, S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates, MarketAxess and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Market liquidity indicators are based on the methodology set out in “Systemic liquidity risk: a monitoring framework”, ESRB, 
February 2025. Indicators are smoothed by a five-day moving average to adjust for seasonal patterns in weekdays. Panel a: composite 
liquidity indicator based on bid-ask spread, bid-ask spread dispersion, market efficiency coefficient, share of non-quoted or non-traded 
securities, transaction spread, traded volume, turnover ratio and average number of market-makers. Some indicators are available with 
a time lag and hence not included in the most recent data points. Panel b: in addition to the measures in panel a, this composite indicator 
is also based on the Amihud ratio, effective spread, trade size, number of trades and Bloomberg liquidity measures. Z-scores since 2012.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

21 The World Gold Council estimates that in Q1 2025, 33% of gold production was used for jewellery, 6% for 
technology, 19% by central banks and 42% as an investment. See “Historical demand and supply”, World 
Gold Council, 30 April 2025, accessed 6 May 2025.

22 However, gold can be used as collateral to borrow against or can be lent to yield a lease rate.

23 A safe haven is an asset that is expected to retain or increase its value in times of market stress or 
turmoil, which usually means that it is either uncorrelated or negatively correlated with risky assets. See, 
for example, Baur, D.G. and Lucey, B.M., “Is Gold a Hedge or a Safe Haven? An Analysis of Stocks, 
Bonds and Gold”, The Financial Review, Vol. 45, Issue 2, May 2010, pp. 217-229.

24 See O’Connor, F.A., Lucey, B.M., Batten, J.A. and Baur, D.G., “The financial economics of gold – A 
survey”, International Review of Financial Analysis, Vol. 41, October 2015, pp. 186-205. Recent research 
also shows that gold fulfils the criteria for high-quality liquid assets; see Baur, D.G., Gornall, D., Hoang, 
L.T. and Palmberg, J., Is Gold a High-Quality Liquid Asset?, SSRN, December 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

a) Performance of different asset classes during 
stress episodes

b) Gold price and gold purchases by central banks

(Jan. 1997-Mar. 2025, Sharpe ratios) 
(Q1 2010-Q1 2025; left-hand scale: USD/oz, right-hand scale: tonnes)

Sources: IMF IFS, respective central banks, World Gold Council, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Haver Analytics, Caldara and Iacoviello*, Baker, Bloom and Davis** 
and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the Sharpe ratios are calculated as the average return of the asset class during periods of high geopolitical risk, high economic policy uncertainty, 
high stock market volatility or a combination of the three where at least two of the conditions are met at the same time (overlapping scenarios), divided by the 
standard deviation. Levels of risk indicators are regarded as high when they fall within the 90th percentile over the sample period. Geopolitical risk is measured 
by the geopolitical risk index developed by Caldara and Iacoviello*, whereas economic policy uncertainty is evaluated based on the methodology of Baker, 
Bloom and Davis**. The VIX index is used to measure stock market volatility. 
*) Caldara, D. and Iacoviello, M., “Measuring Geopolitical Risk”, American Economic Review, Vol. 112, No 4, April 2022, pp. 1194-1225. 
**) Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S., “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, No 4, November 2016, 
pp. 1593-1636.

25 See the box entitled “Gold demand: the role of the official sector and geopolitics”, The international role of 
the euro, ECB, forthcoming. Notably, the increase in demand for gold has led to a reversal in the negative 
correlation between long-term real rates and the gold price. See Chapter 2 of the Financial Stability 
Review, ECB, November 2024.

26 Sovereign bonds and the US dollar perform even better, indicating a stronger rotation towards these 
assets during more traditional episodes of financial stress.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

27 Besides the London Bullion Market, COMEX in New York is the major trading centre for gold. Historically, 
the London market has been the main centre for trading in physical gold and non-physically settled OTC 
gold derivatives while the COMEX market has been the main centre for physically settled gold 
derivatives.

28 Bank of America Global Fund Manager Survey, February 2025 and March 2025.

29 Gold, along with other metals, has been exempted from the proposed import tariffs.

30 See Hook, L., “US gold rush drives up borrowing costs for precious metal in London”, Financial Times, 5 
February 2025; Lipsky, C., “Trump’s tariff threats stress London gold market”, FX Markets, 20 February 
2025; and Hook, L., “Gold stockpiling in New York leads to London shortage”, Financial Times, 29 
January 2025.

32 In 2022, for instance, the London Metal Exchange experienced severe disruptions with regard to nickel. 
See Heilbron, J., “Central Clearing and Trade Cancellation: The Case of LME Nickel Contracts on March 
8, 2022”, Working Papers, No 24-09, Office of Financial Research, December 2024.

33 This compares with gross notional volumes of €106 billion in aluminium, €52 billion in silver, €46 billion in 
nickel and €20 trillion in equity derivatives at 31 March 2025.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

through exchange-traded funds (ETFs) amounted to €50 billion in the fourth quarter of 2024 and were 
rather small compared with counterparties’ total financial assets. Gold ETFs were held predominantly 
by households and investment funds.

a) COMEX 100 gold futures contracts noticed for 
delivery, COMEX gold inventories and the EPU

b) Gold derivative and gold ETF exposures, by 
counterparty sector

(Jan. 2020-Apr. 2025; left-hand scale: millions of troy ounces, 
right-hand scale: thousands of contracts)

(left graph: 31 Mar. 2025, right graph: Q4 2024, percentages)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., ECB (SHS, EMIR), Baker, Bloom and Davis* and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: EPU stands for economic policy uncertainty index, rescaled on the left axis. The index is based on the methodology of Baker, Bloom and Davis*. 
Inventory is calculated as the sum of eligible and registered gold COMEX inventory stocks. Panel b: derivative exposures by counterparty look at both legs of 
derivatives contract exposures and their counterparties. All aggregated derivatives contracts include a euro area counterparty. Shares of derivative exposures 
are weighted by gross notional volume of contracts. Gold ETF exposures show euro area counterparties’ gold ETF exposures. OFIs stands for other financial 
institutions; ICPFs stands for insurance corporations and pension funds; NFCs stands for non-financial corporations. 
*) Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S., op. cit.

34 See “The Financial Stability Aspects of Commodities Markets”, Financial Stability Board, February 2023.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

2.3 
Higher inflows and the prospect of fiscal expansion could 
support euro area financial markets

Chart 2.8 
The planned fiscal expansion contributed to an improved market sentiment for the 
euro area relative to the United States

a) Relative performance of euro area and US 
composite PMIs and equity prices

b) Impact of fiscal expansion announcements

(Apr. 2022-Apr. 2025; left-hand scale: relative PMI, right-hand 
scale: relative equity performance, ratios)

(1 Nov. 2024-13 May 2025; left-hand scale: percentages, 
right-hand scale: index: 31 Oct. 2024 = 100)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., LSEG and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: ratio of EURO STOXX to S&P 500, and of euro area composite PMI to US composite PMI. EA stands for euro area. 
Panel b: the first vertical line marks the Munich Security Conference, the second line the announcement of the German and EU fiscal 
expansion packages and the third line refers to 2 April. Ratio of defence sector sub-index (UBS EU Defence Spending Index) to broad 
market index (EURO STOXX). “Weighted spread” is the difference in the GDP-weighted ten-year yields of higher- and lower-rated euro 
area sovereigns.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

36 For example, in the April and May editions of the Bank of America’s European Fund Manager Survey, 
almost half of the respondents indicated that they see “German fiscal and European defence spending as 
a game changer”.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.9 
Sovereign bond spreads could rise with higher defence spending, especially given the 
recent investor optimism reflected in higher market-implied sovereign ratings

a) Estimated change in ten-year sovereign 
bond yields associated with higher defence 
spending

b) Distance market-implied rating and actual 
rating

(percentage points) 
(6 Mar. 2020-13 May 2025, difference in rating steps)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., European Defence Agency, ECB (BSI, GFS), Eurostat, Moody’s Analytics, Goldman Sachs and ECB 
calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the x-axis shows three different scenarios, whereby defence spending rises from the individual euro area country’s levels 
as a share of GDP to 2.5%, 3% and 5% of GDP. The y-axis shows the estimated change in ten-year sovereign bond yields. Countries 
included in the sample are Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Italy, Netherlands, Austria and Finland. The model consists of a system of 
linear regression equations at a monthly frequency, with ten-year sovereign bond yields for each country as the dependent variables and 
the following independent variables: one-year-ahead nominal growth expectations, debt-to-GDP ratio (quarterly data interpolated to 
monthly), one-year-ahead EC forecasts of primary balance (percentage of GDP), CBOE Option Implied Volatility Index, ECB public 
sector purchase programme sovereign debt holdings (percentage outstanding), the ECB’s euro area systemic stress indicator composite 
index and the ECB’s deposit facility rate. One-year-ahead forecasts are the geometric moving average of current and next-year 
expectations. To control for the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on bond yields, including the ECB’s support efforts through the public 
sector purchase programme, a COVID-19 dummy variable is included, which takes a value of 1 for all dates from 1 January 2020 to 31 
August 2024, and 0 otherwise. Interaction terms between the COVID-19 dummy and each of the independent variables are included to 
debias the debt estimator. The model is estimated jointly using seemingly unrelated regression to account for potential correlations in the 
factors affecting the sovereign yields across the different countries. The sample period is from 2015 to August 2024. It is assumed that 
the additional defence spending will be financed by additional sovereign debt. Panel b: high debt levels are defined as debt-to-GDP 
above 100%, medium between 60% and 100%, and low below 60% at the end of 2024. Average of market-implied ratings from bond and 
credit default swap pricing, based on Moody’s MIR methodology.* 
*) See Dwyer, D.W., Moore, D. and Wang, Y., “Moody’s Market Implied Ratings: Description and Methodology”, Moody’s Analytics, 2019.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

The valuations of euro area banks improved up until late March but have been 
volatile since then amid increased uncertainty about the outlook for banks’ 
earnings. Euro area banks’ share prices outperformed the broad market indices in the 
first three months of 2025, and their median price-to-book ratio rose above 1 in late 
March. This was supported by robust earnings and an improvement in investor 
sentiment towards the euro area (Chapter 2), including towards banks (Chart 3.1, 
panel a, left graph). However, bank share prices have been more volatile since 2 April,

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.1 
Euro area banks’ valuations improved up to March 2025 but have been volatile since 
the US tariff announcement, while the valuation gap versus US banks has narrowed

a) Euro area banks’ price-to-book ratios 
b) Euro area and US banks’ price-to-book 
ratios and ROE

(left graph: 1 Jan. 2022-13 May 2025, right graph: 
31 Dec. 2024-13 May 2025; ratios) 
(6 Jan. 2023-9 May 2025; left-hand scale: ratio, right-hand scale: 
percentage points)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: based on banks in the EURO STOXX Banks index. Panel a, right graph: median price-to-book ratios for banks in the 
top/bottom 50% of the distribution of 2025 ROE estimates. Panel b: based on the EURO STOXX Banks and KBW Bank indices covering 
27 banks in the euro area and 23 banks in the United States. The shaded area depicts the difference between the average ROE of euro 
area banks and US banks.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.2 
Profitability remained solid overall, but the dispersion of bank-level ROE is still wide, 
with limited improvement in the lowest quartile of banks

a) Decomposition of year-on-year changes in 
ROE and the level of ROE

b) Dispersion of bank-level ROE and key 
indicators for high and low performers

(Q1 2021-Q4 2024, percentage points and percentages) 
(left graph: 2019-24, right graph: 2021, 2024; percentages)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Based on a balanced sample of 87 euro area significant institutions. Panel a: based on four-quarter trailing values. Panel b, right 
graph: median values for banks in the top and bottom ROE quartiles based on 2024 ROE. NII stands for net interest income; NONII 
stands for non-interest income; OPEX stands for operating expenses; LLP stands for loan loss provisions; TA stands for total assets.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.3 
Net interest income is set to decline, with revenue growth expected to be more reliant 
on continued growth in fee and commission income

a) Bank loan-deposit spreads 
and net interest margins

b) Growth of (gross) fee and 
commission income

c) The growth of operating 
expenses and its components

(Q1 2016-Q4 2024, percentages) 
(Q1 2022-Q4 2024, percentage points) 
(2020-24, percentage points)

Sources: ECB (BSI, MIR, supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: loan-deposit spreads are based on all euro area banks (quarterly averages), while the net interest margin is based on the 
full sample of significant institutions. Panel b: based on a sample of 87 significant institutions. Year-on-year growth of quarterly fee and 
commission income. AM stands for asset management; FCI stands for fee and commission income. Panel c: based on a sample of 87 
significant institutions. DGS stands for deposit guarantee schemes; RF stands for resolution funds.

39 See “ENISA threat landscape: finance sector”, European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, 2024.

40 See “Agility in volatility: Rebalancing CRO priorities in a shifting risk matrix”, EYGM Limited, 2025.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.4 
Profitability is expected to decline slightly in 2025 due to pressure on net interest 
income and slightly higher cost of risk

a) Actual and projected ROE 
for a sample of listed banks

b) Projected NII growth for a 
sample of listed banks

c) Actual and projected cost of 
risk for a sample of listed 
banks

(2018-26, percentages) 
(2025-26, percentages) 
(2018-26, percentages)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: based on market analyst projections of ROE for a sample of 32 listed euro area banks. Panel b: listed banks are divided 
into two groups, based on their share of floating-rate loans. The median share of floating-rate loans is 48% and 36% for the “floating” and 
“fixed” groups respectively. NII stands for net interest income. Panel c: cost of risk is defined as the ratio of loan loss provisions to total 
loans.

41 For the euro and other major currencies (e.g. the US dollar, the pound sterling), the parallel downward 
shock used to calculate net interest income sensitivities is -200 basis points.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Box 3 
 
The deposit franchise value of euro area banks

Prepared by Cosimo Pancaro, Valerio Passantino and Allegra Pietsch

42 See (i) Drechsler, I., Savov, A. and Schnabl, P., “Banking on Deposits: Maturity Transformation without 
Interest Rate Risk”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 76, No 3, February 2021, pp. 1091-1143; (ii) Drechsler, 
I., Savov, A. and Schnabl, P., “How to value the deposit franchise”, New York University Stern School of 
Business, 2023; (iii) Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P. and Wang, O., “Deposit Franchise Runs”, 
Working Paper Series, No 31138, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2023; (iv) DeMarzo, 
P.M., Krishnamurthy, A. and Nagel, S., “Interest Rate Risk in Banking”, Working Paper Series, No 33308, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2024; (v) Demsetz, R.S., Saidenberg, M.R. and 
Strahan, P.E., “Banks with Something to Lose: The Disciplinary Role of Franchise Value”, Economic 
Policy Review, Vol. 2, No 2, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October 1996, pp. 1-14; and (vi) Kwan, 
S. and Martinez, Z., “Bank Franchise as a Stabilizing Force”, Economic Letters, No 2024-20, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August 2024.

43 The analysis in this box estimates the deposit franchise value for a sample of euro area banks. Following 
the approaches proposed by Drechsler et al. (see (ii) and (iii) in footnote above) and DeMarzo et al. (see 
(iv) in footnote above), a bank’s deposit franchise value can be computed as the present value of a 
ten-year discounted cash flow of the difference between the deposit spread income and the operating 
expenses of the deposit franchise. The deposit spread income is a hypothetical profit that banks can earn 
by borrowing at the deposit rate and placing funds in the money market at the risk-free overnight rate. 
Estimates for bank-level deposit betas, fixed deposit spreads and the costs of deposit provision as a 
share of operating expenses are used as inputs. Model inputs are derived from a regression of individual 
banks’ deposit rates on the euro short-term rate, two-year swap spreads and five-year swap spreads. 
The euro area ten-year sovereign bond yield is used to discount cash flows and to proxy the long-run 
overnight money market rate, including a risk premium and a term premium.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart A 
The deposit franchise value changes with the interest rate environment, the degree of market 
concentration and operating expenses

a) Deposit franchise value 
distribution across banks and euro 
area long-term interest rate

b) Market concentration and 
deposit franchise value, by 
country

c) Bank market share and 
operating expenses, by deposit 
franchise value quartile

(July 2007-Dec. 2024; left-hand scale: value per 
euro of deposits, right-hand scale: percentages)

(2007-24; x-axis: index, y-axis: value per euro of 
deposits)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data, MIR, BSI, SSI) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Changing sample over time of 88 significant institutions. Cost estimates are only available as of Q4 2014 and are backward-filled over the entire time 
frame. Panel b: the country-specific yearly concentration (Herfindahl) index for credit institutions’ total assets is available up to 2023 and forward-filled for 2024. 
For further explanations on the underlying methodology, see Guideline 2021/830 of the European Central Bank on balance sheet item statistics and interest rate 
statistics of monetary financial institutions (ECB/2021/11). Long-term median over the entire time frame for countries with more than three banks. Panel c: 
long-term median over the entire time frame and sample. “Unit cost of deposits” refers to the operating expenses associated with each euro of deposits, while 
“market share” refers to individual banks’ share of total assets in a given country.

46 See Drechsler, I., Savov, A. and Schnabl, P., “The Deposits Channel of Monetary Policy”, The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, Vol. 132, No 4, pp. 1819-1876, November 2017, and Kho, S., “Deposit market 
concentration and monetary transmission: Evidence from the euro area”, European Economic Review, 
Vol. 173, No 104933, April 2025.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart B 
Higher deposit franchise values are associated with higher market valuations

a) Average deposit franchise value and price-to-book 
ratio

b) Market valuations and deposit franchise value

(Q1 2008-Q4 2024; left-hand scale: percentages, right-hand scale: value per 
euro of deposits)

(Dec. 2024; x-axis: value per euro of deposits, y-axis: percentages)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data, MIR, BSI), Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: a changing sample of 42 listed significant institutions over time. Panel b: a comparison of market valuations and deposit franchise values for a 
sample of 26 listed significant institutions.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.5 
Asset quality remains robust overall, but this masks diverging trends at country level

b) Net NPL flows 
c) Net NPL flows and NPL 
ratios in 2024, by country

(Q1 2021-Q4 2024, percentages) 
(Q1 2021-Q4 2024, € billions) 
(Q4 2024, x-axis: basis points, y-axis: 
percentages)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel b: excludes loans held for sale. NFC stands for non-financial corporations; HH stands for households. Panel c: x-axis 
shows four-quarter rolling net NPL flows as a share of total loans in Q4 2024. In the calculation of the NPL ratio, cash balances at central 
banks and other demand deposits are excluded. Blue dots represent countries which experienced net NPL inflows over the period, while 
yellow dots represent countries which experienced net NPL outflows. Countries with fewer than three significant institutions are not 
shown. Country refers to the domicile of the bank. EA stands for euro area.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.6 
Pockets of slow deterioration in asset quality remain in CRE, SME and consumer loan 
portfolios

a) CRE NPL ratio, by location 
of exposure

b) SME asset quality ratios 
(excluding CRE loans)

(Q4 2023-Q4 2024, percentages) 
(Q1 2021-Q4 2024, percentages) 
(Q1 2021-Q4 2024, percentages)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Based on a balanced sample of 87 significant institutions. Panel a: CRE NPL ratios are based on loans collateralised by 
commercial immovable property. NPL ratios are shown for countries with the largest CRE exposures (by location of borrower).

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.7 
Credit risk may rise for some non-financial corporations in a weaker economic 
environment, which could also cause banks’ provisioning needs to increase

a) Lending to manufacturing industries, and 
extra-EU goods export shares

b) NPL and coverage ratios for countries with 
net NPL inflows and outflows

(Feb. 2025; percentage of total NFC loans, Q4 2024, percentage of 
GDP)

Sources: Eurostat, ECB (supervisory data, AnaCredit, RIAD) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: loan exposure is expressed as a share of total NFC lending. Manufacturing sectors are those with NACE code C (10-32). 
Extra-EU goods exports as a share of GDP is calculated as at Q4 2024. Countries with the ten largest loan exposures to manufacturing 
sectors are shown. EA stands for euro area. Panel b: based on a full sample of significant institutions. Countries are grouped based on 
whether they had net NPL inflows or outflows in 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

3.3 
Banks’ funding costs have fallen but are encountering 
frictions on their downward path

Chart 3.8 
Bank bond yields have fallen, but spreads have been volatile recently

a) Decomposition of the 
average secondary market 
bank bond yield

b) Secondary market bank 
bond spreads, by seniority

c) Primary market bank bond 
issuance, by seniority

(1 Jan. 2022-13 May 2025, percentages) 
(1 Jan. 2022-13 May 2025, basis points) 
(1 Jan.-13 May 2025, € millions)

Sources: S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates, Dealogic, a service of ION Analytics and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the risk-free rate is the weighted average benchmark swap rate matching the maturity of banks’ outstanding bonds. The 
bank swap spread is the weighted average asset swap spread over the benchmark swap rate. Panel c: Dashed line marks 2 April 2025, 
the day of the announcement of trade tariffs by the US Administration.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.9 
Deposit rates decline but differences across countries persist, while deposit supply 
has shifted towards overnight accounts

a) New business deposit rates b) Average NSFR vs average

c) Quarterly deposit flows and 
annual growth

(Jan. 2022-Mar. 2025, percentages) 
(Q4 2024, percentages) 
(Jan. 2022-Mar. 2025; three-month rolling 
flows, € billions, percentages)

Sources: ECB (MIR, BSI, supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: deposit rates on new business. NFC stands for non-financial corporation; HH stands for household. Panel b: country 
aggregates are weighted averages. Panel c: flows are calculated as changes in stock compared with three months ago.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Box 4 
 
Digital banking: how new bank business models are disrupting traditional banks

Prepared by Thomas Garcia, Maciej Grodzicki and Petya Radulova

Digitalisation is transforming the delivery of banking services, leading to the emergence of 
new digital bank business models. Digital banks do business solely in the online space, without 
developing bricks-and-mortar branch networks. As at year-end 2024, about 60 banks in the euro area 
were identified as being digital-only.49 Seven of these banks are subsidiaries of traditional banks. The 
market share of digital banks increased from 3.1% of total assets in 2019 to 3.9% in 2024 thanks to 
the expansion of established players and the entry of new competitors. This box spotlights features of 
digital bank business models, contrasts them with those of traditional banks and presents the 
financial stability risks that may be associated with the rise of digital banks.

48 See the box entitled “Euro area banks as intermediators of US dollar liquidity via repo and FX swap 
markets”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart A 
Digital banks follow a narrow business model, characterised by a heavy reliance on retail deposit 
funding and high asset-side concentration

a) Funding structures of digital banks and euro area 
significant institutions

b) Business model classification of digital banks 
based on asset portfolio

(Q1 2018-Q4 2024, percentages) 
(End-2024, percentages)

Source: ECB (supervisory data). 
Notes: Panel a: based on a sample of 59 digital banks. The bar on the right-hand side is the euro area funding composition based on the consolidated reporting 
of significant institutions (SIs), as of end-2024. Panel b: based on a sample of 54 digital banks. The classification of digital bank business models is based on the 
predominant asset types in portfolios. The asset composition of banks following unique business models is distorted by an online broker which reports in 
accordance with German accounting standards; these classify custodial deposits as assets and liabilities of the broker. Asset concentration is based on the 
Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) and refers to the asset holding diversification in a digital bank’s portfolio: HHI > 25% indicates a concentrated portfolio. NFC 
stands for non-financial corporation; CB stands for central bank; HH stands for household; HH cons stands for household consumer; MMF stands for money 
market fund; SI stands for significant institution.

50 The price elasticity of household deposit volumes, estimated using linear panel models, is significantly 
higher for online banks than for their traditional peers.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart B 
While digital banks are less profitable and pay higher deposit rates to customers, they are highly 
valued by investors

a) Return on equity of digital banks b) Cost of household deposits 
c) Equity valuations of digital 
banks

(Q1 2019-Q4 2024, percentages) 
(Q1 2019-Q4 2024, basis points) 
(x-axis: Jan. 2021-Mar. 2025, fundraising date; 
y-axis: implied price-to-tangible book value ratio, 
multiples, log scale)

Sources: Company announcements and ECB (supervisory data). 
Notes: Panel a: in Q4 2024 the median return on equity of traditional banks stood at 9.9%, 2.9 percentage points higher than that of digital banks. Panel b: cost 
of household deposits calculated as median ratio of total interest expenses to total volumes of deposits, annualised. SI stands for significant institution. Panel c: 
most digital banks are privately held. Value of digital banks estimated based on announced terms of equity-raising transactions. Tangible book values calculated 
from company accounts and supervisory reporting. For better readability, price-to-tangible book value ratio is plotted on a logarithmic scale. The comparable ratio 
for a traditional bank in the euro area tends to be close to 1.

51 In the fourth quarter of 2024, online banks had administrative expenses excluding staff expenses that 
were twice as high as for traditional banks (1% vs 0.5% of total assets). These administrative costs were 
driven by substantial operating expenses in building and maintaining IT infrastructure related to their 
online business (2.4% vs 1.3% of total assets for traditional banks), as well as advertising, marketing and 
communication expenses which were three times as high as for traditional banks (0.9% vs 0.3% of total 
assets). In addition, while online banks do not rely on a branch network, real estate expenses relative to 
total assets are comparable to traditional peers due to the smaller scale at which digital banks currently 
operate, thus limiting any comparative advantage for these expenses.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

3.4 
Banks maintain robust liquidity and capital buffers

Chart 3.10 
Liquidity buffers remain ample, but the composition has changed

a) Composition of euro area banks’ HQLA 
b) Estimated repricing risk from sovereign 
bond holdings on solvency and liquidity ratios 
in response to interest rate shock

(Q1 2017-Q4 2024; percentages, € trillions) 
(Q1 2020-Q4 2024, percentages)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data, SHS) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: shows the respective shares of sovereign bonds and excess reserves in total HQLA for euro area significant institutions. 
Panel b: estimates the gross valuation effects on bond portfolios in response to a parallel shift in the yield curve of 100 basis points, 
assuming no changes in spreads and not considering hedges. For the LCR, only marked-to-market impact from holdings of Level 1 
sovereign bonds is considered. Level 1 sovereign bond holdings account for 80% of euro area banks’ sovereign bond holdings.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.11 
Solvency ratios have been supported by strong earnings, allowing for generous 
shareholder remuneration

a) Decomposition of changes in the aggregate 
CET1 ratio

b) Euro area bank share buybacks and 
dividend payout ratios

(Q4 2023-Q4 2024; CET1 ratio: percentages, contributions: 
percentage points)

(2015-24; left-hand scale: percentages of net income, right-hand 
scale: € billions)

Sources: ECB (supervisory data) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: retained earnings capture the contribution of profits net of dividends. Share buybacks directly reduce equity through 
capital instruments, while dividends are subtracted from distributable earnings before appearing as retained earnings. OCI stands for 
other comprehensive income; CET1 stands for Common Equity Tier 1 capital. Panel b: total shareholder remuneration is defined as the 
sum of dividends and buybacks. Dividend payouts and buybacks that are carried out between Q1 and Q3 of a given year are counted 
towards remuneration from the previous year.

52 Banks have increasingly used amortised cost accounting in recent years, which shields equity from 
unrealised losses. HQLA are always marked-to-market for LCR calculations; see Articles 415-418 of 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on 
prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) 
No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1) and Articles 7-9 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 
2015/61 of 10 October 2014 to supplement Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament 
and the Council with regard to liquidity coverage requirement for Credit Institutions (OJ L 11, 17.1.2015, 
p. 1).

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

53 The ECB encouraged banks not to pay dividends in 2020 and only lifted its recommendation as of 
September 2021 (see “ECB asks banks not to pay dividends until at least October 2020”, press release, 
ECB, 27 March 2020, and “ECB decides not to extend dividend recommendation beyond September 
2021”, press release, ECB, 23 July 2021).

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Chart 3.12 
The level of releasable capital buffer requirements varies across countries

Releasable capital buffers across euro area countries

(Q4 2024, percentages of domestic risk-weighted assets)

Sources: ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Sample based on 2,314 significant institutions and less significant institutions. The chart includes current rates and announced 
rates that will take effect before the end of January 2026. The systemic risk buffer (SyRB) for France is not included owing to insufficient 
data on the implementation perimeter. The height of the bars represents the releasable buffers as announced by national authorities, i.e. 
the domestic countercyclical buffer (CCyB) and (sectoral) SyRB. For the broad SyRB applied to all exposures (foreign and domestic), 
only the capital associated with domestic risk-weighted assets is considered in order to ensure cross-country comparability.

54 In December 2024 Portugal announced that it would introduce a positive neutral CCyB rate of 0.75% 
from 1 January 2026. Furthermore, in January 2025 Cyprus announced that, owing to the heightened 
cyclical systemic risk and increased probability of tail risk events due to geopolitical developments, it 
would raise the rate, from 1% to 1.5%, with effect from 14 January 2026.

55 See “Using the countercyclical capital buffer to build resilience early in the cycle”, ECB/ESRB, January 
2025.

56 For details on a conceptual framework illustrating the channels through which trade tensions may affect 
the real economy and the financial system, as well as an empirical assessment of their impact on the 
latter, see the special feature entitled “Risks to euro area financial stability from trade tensions” in this 
edition of the Financial Stability Review.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

58 See “Governing Council statement on macroprudential policies – the ECB’s framework for assessing 
capital buffers of other systemically important institutions”, ECB, 20 December 2024.

59 Regulation (EU) 2024/1623 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2024 amending 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 as regards requirements for credit risk, credit valuation adjustment risk, 
operational risk, market risk and the output floor (OJ L, 2024/1623, 19.6.2024).

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

60 For example, the reform of the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process aimed, among other things, 
at making the methodology more intuitive and at reducing procedural complexity (see The Supervision 
Blog posts on (i) reforming the SREP, and (ii) reviewing the Pillar 2 requirement methodology); and the 
development (jointly with other authorities) of the Integrated Reporting Framework (IReF), which will 
integrate the Eurosystem’s statistical and prudential reporting requirements for banks, thereby reducing 
redundancies and overlaps, and minimising the reporting burden.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Euro area banking sector

Non-banks remain key investors in euro area sovereign debt markets, but 
valuation dynamics have shifted portfolios towards riskier asset types. Along 
with overall sector growth, the euro area non-bank financial intermediation (NBFI) 
sector continued to expand its nominal holdings of euro area sovereign bonds in 2024. 
Higher volumes in sovereign debt issuances and increased purchases by households 
and non-euro area investors have, however, led to a slight reduction in the overall 
share of outstanding sovereign debt absorbed by non-banks (Chart 4.1, panel a).

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Chart 4.1 
Non-banks’ share in outstanding euro area sovereign debt has declined slightly, while 
valuation changes and transactions have shifted portfolios towards riskier asset types

a) Euro area non-banks’ holdings of euro area 
long-term sovereign and NFC debt at nominal 
value

b) Euro area non-banks’ total holdings of 
equity and debt instruments at market value

(2021-24; € trillions, percentages of amounts outstanding) 
(2021-24, € trillions)

Sources: ECB (CSDB, SHS) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: amounts outstanding exclude Eurosystem holdings. NFC stands for non-financial corporation. Panel b: investment 
funds’ holdings are calculated by subtracting the portion of holdings attributed to insurance corporations and pension funds via 
investment fund shares from their total holdings. Insurance corporation and pension fund holdings via investment fund shares are 
obtained following the look-through approach outlined by Carvalho and Schmitz*). 
*) Carvalho, D. and Schmitz, M., “Shifts in the portfolio holdings of euro area investors in the midst of COVID-19: looking-through 
investment funds”, Working Paper Series, No 2526, ECB, 2021.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Chart 4.2 
Non-banks may increasingly face the risk of sudden portfolio valuation changes and 
margin calls in the context of global trade conflicts

a) Euro area non-banks’ 
holdings of European sectors 
exposed to US trade

b) Euro area non-banks’ 
holdings of USD-denominated 
assets

c) Euro area non-banks’ 
cumulative variation margin 
posted, by derivative contract 
type

(2024, percentages) 
(2024; percentages, percentages of 
USD-denominated assets held)

(3-9 April 2025; € billions, percentages of 
cash holdings)

Sources: ECB (CSDB, EMIR, SHS), OECD and ECB calculations. 
Notes: IFs stands for investment funds; ICs stands for insurance corporations; PFs stands for pension funds; ICPFs stands for insurance 
corporations and pension funds. Panel a: European US-import and US-export-reliant sectors are defined as those scoring above the 
75th percentile in the OECD's foreign input reliance and foreign market reliance indicators respectively. Total securities holdings include 
debt securities, listed shares and investment fund units. Panel b: the EUR/USD FX derivative gross notional share is calculated as the 
total FX derivative gross notional outstanding on EUR/USD divided by the total of USD-denominated debt securities and listed shares 
held. Panel c: the variation margin posted is computed by aggregating net flows of variation margins at the entity level.

4.2 
Liquidity mismatches and increasing leverage in parts of 
the investment fund sector

Flows into euro area corporate funds have reversed amid rising trade tensions, 
while demand for real estate and sustainable funds remains muted. A wide range 
of euro area investment funds continued to see sizeable inflows after the last edition of 
the Financial Stability Review was published, contributing to further sector growth in 
the second half of 2024 and early 2025. Flows into bond funds continued to outpace 
flows into equity funds in relative terms, while environmental, social and governance 
(ESG) investors also shifted from equities to bonds. However, the US tariff 
announcements at the beginning of April triggered a sharp reversal in corporate bond 
fund flows as investors reduced their exposure to riskier assets, most notably

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Chart 4.3 
Tariff announcements in early April triggered a sharp reversal in corporate bond fund 
flows, while real estate funds remain under pressure

a) Cumulative flows into euro area-domiciled 
investment funds, by fund type

b) Annualised net flows into euro area real 
estate funds and annual changes in 
commercial real estate prices

(2 Jan. 2024-13 May 2025; percentages of total net assets) 
(Jan. 2020-Feb. 2025; percentages of total net assets, percentage 
changes)

Sources: ECB (IVF, RESC), EPFR Global and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: ESG stands for environmental, social and governance; SRI stands for socially responsible investing; IG stands for 
investment-grade; HY stands for high-yield. Panel b: net flows are annualised by aggregating all fund flows over a one-year period. EA 
CRE stands for euro area commercial real estate. Monthly values of EA CRE prices are derived by interpolating the quarterly series, with 
the latest available data point being Q4 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Chart 4.4 
Liquidity mismatches and procyclical fund flow dynamics can amplify market shocks

a) Fund-level redemption coverage ratios, by 
fund type

b) Cumulative flows and performance of euro 
area investment funds, by investment focus

(2021-24, ratios) 
(3 Apr.-13 May 2025, percentages of total net assets, percentage 
changes)

Sources: ECB (CSDB), EPFR Global, LSEG Lipper and ECB calculations. 
Notes: IG stands for investment-grade; HY stands for high-yield. Panel a: the redemption coverage ratio (RCR) measures investment 
funds’ resilience to redemption shocks, following the methodology set out in the November 2023 Financial Stability Review*). The RCR is 
obtained by dividing the value of fund-level high-quality liquid assets according to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 by 
net outflows experienced in a severe but plausible scenario lasting 30 days. The box plots display the distribution per fund group of the 
resulting fund-level RCRs. The whiskers refer to the 5th and 95th percentiles. MMFs stands for money market funds. 
*) See the box entitled “Assessing liquidity vulnerabilities in open-ended bond funds: a fund-level redemption coverage ratio 
approach”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November 2023.

61 Total assets of euro area funds classified as hedge funds according to the ECB’s investment fund 
statistics amounted to €595 billion at the end of 2024.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Chart 4.5 
Rising leverage in both UCITS and alternative hedge funds

a) Euro area investment funds’ financial 
leverage, by fund type

b) Euro area investment funds’ activity in 
derivatives markets, by fund type

(Jan. 2021-Feb. 2025, total assets as percentage shares of shares 
issued)

(Q4 2024, gross notional as percentage shares of total assets)

Sources: ECB (EMIR, IVF) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: UCITS stands for undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities; AIF stands for alternative investment fund.

Box 5 
 
Examining the dynamics of liquid asset holdings in the non-bank financial sector

Prepared by Paolo Alberto Baudino, Pierce Daly and Manuela Storz

62 HQLA levels are defined according to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61. This regulation 
defines HQLA Level 1 as the most liquid assets, including bonds issued by EU Member States and 
related authorities/entities or high-rated covered bonds with large issuances. HQLA Level 2 is further 
divided into Levels 2A and 2B. Level 2A generally includes various types of liquid bond that meet explicit 
liquidity criteria, while Level 2B also includes shares from major stock indices that meet specific stress 
conditions.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Chart A 
Investment shifts and valuation changes have made non-banks’ aggregate portfolios less liquid

a) Changes in liquid asset holdings over time 
b) Breakdown of cumulative changes in cash and 
securities holdings

(Q1 2014-Q4 2024, percentages of total assets) 
(Q1 2014-Q4 2024, € trillions)

Sources: ECB (CSDB, ICB, IVF, SHS) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Cash equivalents include deposits, currency, loan claims and money market fund shares. The levels of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) are defined 
according to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61. Panel b: the cumulative valuation changes of asset classes may be defined as the variation in 
holdings that is not attributable to transactions.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Non-bank financial sector

Chart B 
A larger share of equities may make it harder to liquidate assets during periods of market stress

a) Cumulative changes in insurance corporations’ 
holdings of investment fund shares, by fund 
investment policy