as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and

businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of mone-

tary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic

and financial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy

judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price

stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal

funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past.

Owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges

that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to

use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals.

The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly mea-

surable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and

dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for

employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the

shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are neces-

The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the

Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its

judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price

index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the

Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expecta-

tions that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest

rates and enhance the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of

significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this

level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and there-

fore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent,

appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for

Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In

setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from

the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run

goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a sta-

ble financial system. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its

medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial

system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.

The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However,

under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it

takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different

time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consis-

The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its

annual organizational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough

public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.

Inflation has continued to moderate this year, though it remains somewhat elevated. The labor

market is in solid shape, with a moderate pace of job gains so far this year and the unemploy-

ment rate at a low level. Although growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have

paused in the first quarter, growth in private domestic final demand was moderate, reflecting a

modest increase in consumer spending and a jump in capital spending. However, measures of

household and business sentiment have declined this year amid concerns about the effects of

higher tariffs on inflation and employment as well as heightened uncertainty about the economic

With the labor market at or near maximum employment and inflation continuing to moderate, the

Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained the target range for the federal funds

rate at 4¼ to 4½ percent. The FOMC’s current stance of monetary policy leaves it well posi-

tioned to wait for more clarity on the outlook for inflation and economic activity and to respond

in a timely way to potential economic developments. The Federal Reserve has also continued to

reduce its holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities and, beginning in April,

further slowed the pace of decline to facilitate a smooth transition to ample reserve balances.

The FOMC is strongly committed to supporting maximum employment and returning inflation to its

2 percent objective. In considering the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target

range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving

Inflation. After declining modestly last year, consumer price inflation has continued to ease this

year, although progress has been bumpy. The price index for personal consumption expendi-

and is generally considered a better guide to the future of inflation—rose 2.5 percent over the

Although measures of shorter-term inflation expectations have moved sharply higher this year,

reflecting concerns around tariffs, most measures of longer-term inflation expectations have

broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent inflation.

The labor market. The labor market is in solid shape, with supply and demand about in balance.

The unemployment rate, at 4.2 percent in May, has been relatively flat since the middle of last

year at a level that is low by historical experience; job vacancies have continued to edge down,

while layoff activity has been subdued. As labor demand has cooled somewhat further so far this

year, monthly job gains have slowed to a moderate pace on average. Labor supply has increased

less robustly than in previous years, with immigration appearing to have slowed sharply since

the middle of last year and the labor force participation rate having declined a bit. With the labor

market about in balance, nominal wage gains have continued to moderate this year and are now

close to the pace consistent with 2 percent inflation over the longer term.

Economic activity. After having increased at a solid pace last year, real GDP is reported to have

edged down in the first quarter. The slowdown was mostly due to a historic surge in imports

ahead of expected increases in tariffs that was only partially offset by a pickup in measured

inventories. Growth in private domestic final purchases, in contrast, was moderate in the first

quarter, reflecting a modest increase in consumer spending and a jump in capital spending. Other

Financial conditions. Since the beginning of the year, yields on short- and medium-term nominal

Treasury securities moved moderately lower, on net, reflecting a significant decline in real yields

that offset an increase in near-term inflation compensation. The expected path for the federal

funds rate for this year fluctuated in response to investors’ changing concerns about higher near-

U.S. trade policy before retracing. Spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds increased mod-

estly, consistent with somewhat increased concerns about the corporate outlook, but remained

with lower credit scores. Bank lending to households and businesses grew only slightly, likely

reflecting still-elevated interest rates and tight lending standards.

Financial stability. Overall, the financial system remained resilient amid heightened uncer-

tainty and withstood considerable volatility in April. Smoothing through this volatility, valuations

remained high relative to fundamentals in a range of markets, including those for equities, cor-

decades. The banking system remained sound and resilient, with continued increases in regula-

tory capital, while outside the banking sector, leverage at hedge funds remained near historically

high levels. Vulnerabilities from funding risks improved somewhat since earlier this year, in part

due to a reduction in banks’ reliance on uninsured deposits, particularly at the largest banks.

That said, structural vulnerabilities remain in other cash-investment vehicles, where assets under

management continued to grow. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”)

ported in part by increased demand from U.S. importers that likely reflected a pull-forward ahead

foreign economies have declined notably this year and suggest weakening growth prospects

the federal funds rate at 4¼ to 4½ percent. The FOMC’s current stance of monetary policy leaves

it well positioned to wait for more clarity on the outlook for inflation and economic activity and

respond in a timely way to potential economic developments. In considering the extent and timing

of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will care-

fully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.

from post-pandemic highs. While the benefits of a strong labor market in recent years have been

broadly shared, significant disparities in absolute levels across groups remain. (See the box

sheet has declined since January, as the FOMC has continued to reduce its securities holdings.

est rate in response to the behavior of a small number of economic variables, can provide useful

four months of this year, although at a bumpy pace and with some early signs that higher tariffs

on U.S. goods imports are pushing up prices for some consumer goods. The 12-month change

which exclude often-volatile food and energy prices and are generally considered a better guide

for future inflation—has also eased further this year but remains somewhat elevated, with

inflation in other ways have declined but remain elevated and suggest inflation rates will run

somewhat above 2 percent in the coming months. For example, the 12-month change in the

the preceding 12 months (figure 2, left panel). The pattern is largely due to the notable drop in oil

prices over this period, which reflected actual

and prospective increases in oil supply from

members of OPEC (Organization of the Petro-

leum Exporting Countries) and its partners as

well as concerns about global gross domestic

product (GDP) growth (figure 3). More recently,

near team rose by less, suggesting markets

perceive more-limited risk of lasting disrup-

and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine). The step-up

in food price inflation likely reflects the mod-

Industrial metals
Agriculture and livestock

erate net increase in prices of agricultural

commodities and livestock over the past year

(figure 4). In addition, consumer prices for

Note: The data are weekly averages of daily data and 
extend through June 13, 2025.

eggs are still notably higher than a year ago

despite some recent declines, reflecting the

bird flu–related supply disruptions that have

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
7

Prices of both energy and food products are of particular importance for lower-income house-

holds, for whom such necessities account for a large share of expenditures. Reflecting the sharp

increases seen in 2021 and 2022, prices for these necessities are more than 25 percent higher

than before the pandemic, well above the 15 percent increase that would have been observed if

prices had continued rising at their average rate during the 30 years prior to the pandemic.

Core goods inflation has picked up again . . .

In assessing the outlook for inflation, it is helpful to consider three separate components of core

prices: core goods, housing services, and core nonhousing services (figure 2, right panel). Core

goods inflation has moved back up this year after having receded last year to a pace about in line

with the average annual decline that prevailed in the years before the pandemic: The 12-month

change in PCE core goods prices was 0.2 percent in April, somewhat above the 0.5 percent

decline recorded a year ago, and available data from the consumer price index suggest this read-

ing is likely to increase further in May.

The effects on U.S. consumer prices of the increase in import tariffs this year are highly uncer-

tain, as trade policy continues to evolve, and it is still early to assess how consumers and firms

will respond. Although the effects of tariffs cannot be observed directly in the official consumer

price statistics, the pattern of net price changes among goods categories this year suggests that

tariffs may have contributed to the recent upturn in goods inflation. In particular, average monthly

price changes for some durable goods with exposure to tariff increases, such as household appli-

ances and a variety of consumer electronics, have been somewhat strong since the beginning of

this year. That said, price changes so far this year have not been particularly strong for new motor

vehicles, which have also been exposed to tariff increases.2

Among the other factors that tend to influence core consumer goods inflation, global benchmark

prices for industrial metals have risen modestly, on net, this year (figure 4). However, prices

received by domestic producers of steel and aluminum have risen substantially relative to the

global prices, on net, over this period, likely reflecting the effects of tariffs.

More broadly, nonfuel import prices—which measure the prices paid to foreign producers and

exclude tariffs­—have increased modestly so far this year, suggesting foreign producers have

not responded materially to the higher tariffs by reducing the prices they charge U.S. importers

(figure 5). Accordingly, domestic firms widely report on business surveys that they have faced

increases in input cost pressures this year, which many firms have linked to higher tariffs. For

example, purchasing managers report in both the Institute for Supply Management manufacturing

2 Recent economic analysis of the effects on consumer prices of the increase in tariffs this year includes Robbie 
Minton and Mariano Somale (2025), “Detecting Tariff Effects on Consumer Prices in Real Time,” FEDS Notes 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 9), https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/
notes/feds-notes/detecting-tariff-effects-on-consumer-prices-in-real-time-20250509.html; and Alberto Cavallo, Paola 
Llamas, and Franco Vazquez (2025), “Tracking the Short-Run Price Impact of U.S. Tariffs,” working paper, June 3.

survey and regional Federal Reserve surveys that the prices of inputs used in production have

moved sharply higher this year (figure 6).

Figure 6. Prices paid indexes from 
manufacturing surveys

ISM manufacturing
Average of regional Fed surveys

Note: The regional survey average comprises data 
from the Dallas Fed’s Texas Manufacturing Outlook 
Survey, the Kansas City Fed’s Survey of Tenth 
District Manufacturers, the New York Fed’s Empire 
State Manufacturing Survey, and the Philadelphia 
Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey. ISM is 
Institute for Supply Management.

. . . while housing services price inflation has continued to move lower but 
remains elevated . . .

Housing services price inflation has continued to moderate gradually this year, with prices rising

4.2 percent over the 12 months ending in April, down from 5.7 percent at the same time last year

but still above its pre-pandemic pace. Inflation in this category reflects changes in rents paid by

new and existing tenants, which tend to follow movements in rents for new leases to new tenants

(“market rents”) with a lag. With the increases in market rents having now been near their mod-

erate pre-pandemic average rates for most of the past two years, housing services inflation will

likely continue to move lower as the effects of the large increases in 2021 and 2022 fade further

. . . and core nonhousing services price inflation has eased further to a pace 
roughly in line with its pre-pandemic average

Finally, price inflation for core nonhousing services—a broad group that includes services such

as medical, travel and dining, and financial services—has eased further this year, after progress

appeared to have stalled in the second half of last year. Prices for these services rose 3.0 per-

cent over the 12 months ending in April, below the 3.6 percent increase observed at the same

3 Because prices for housing services measure the rents paid by all tenants (and the equivalent rent implicitly paid by 
all homeowners)—including those whose leases have not recently come up for renewal—they tend to adjust slowly to 
changes in rental market conditions.

Because labor is an important input to many of these service sectors, the declines in price

inflation likely reflect, in part, the ongoing deceleration in labor costs—supported by softening

Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been stable, while 
shorter-term inflation expectations have risen sharply

A generally held view among economists is that inflation expectations influence actual inflation

by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. Most measures suggest longer-term inflation

expectations remain well anchored. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations

Shorter-term inflation expectations, meanwhile, have risen considerably this year. Survey-based

measures of professional forecasters and of households and businesses as well as market-

based measures have all moved higher in recent months, though the extent of increase has

varied. At one extreme, again, is the University of Michigan survey, in which the median expec-

in June, with almost two-thirds of respondents citing tariff-related concerns. Other shorter-term

measures—such as those from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer

Expectations and the Blue Chip survey as well as many measures of businesses’ expectations of

inflation and cost increases—have increased less dramatically, as have market-based inflation

compensation measures for the year ahead.

The labor market remained solid through the first five months of the year

The labor market remains in solid shape, with

has been little changed since the middle of

last year and is low relative to historical expe-

rience (figure 10). Similarly, unemployment

been stable over the past year at relatively

low levels (figure 11). (The box “Employment

provides further details.) The low and fairly

stable unemployment rate has coincided with a pace of monthly payroll job gains that averaged

124,000 over the first five months of this year—a moderate pace that is a bit slower than the

average monthly gain of 168,000 recorded last year (figure 12). Job growth has been fairly broad

based among industries this year, with gains in health care remaining particularly strong.

Demand for labor has remained solid this year

despite some further cooling. Job openings

The gradual cooling in labor demand so far continues to be manifested as a slowdown in hiring

rather than an increase in layoffs. The rate at which unemployed individuals find jobs each month

At the same time, growth in the supply of labor—determined by both changes in the labor force

participation rate (LFPR), which is the share of the population either working or seeking work,

and growth of the working-age population—appears to have slowed since the middle of last year.

The labor market, in aggregate, has held roughly steady in recent months at a level that is solid, 
even if no longer especially tight. As a result, employment disparities across sex, race, ethnicity, and 
education groups—some of which reached historical lows in 2023 and early 2024 on the heels of an 
exceptionally tight labor market—remain narrow compared to typical historical levels. Similarly, nom-
inal wage growth continues to be robust for most groups despite slowing from post-pandemic highs. 
Although the beneﬁ ts of a strong labor market have been broadly shared in recent years, signiﬁ cant 
disparities in absolute levels across groups remain.

Among prime-age people (aged 25 to 54), employment rates for Black or African American workers 
have edged down from their peak last year but remain relatively high compared to historical levels 
(ﬁ gure A, left panel). This movement reﬂ ects both a decline in the labor force participation rate for 
this group and a net increase in their unemployment rate.1 Because the employment-to-population 
(EPOP) ratio for white workers was little changed over the same period, the EPOP ratio gap between 
Black and white individuals has widened somewhat from the 50-year low it attained in early 2024, 
though the current gap is still historically narrow.2 The EPOP ratios for both Hispanic or Latino workers 
and Asian workers, by contrast, have remained quite strong this year. As a result, the EPOP ratio gaps 
for these groups relative to white workers also remain within historically narrow ranges.3

The EPOP ratio for prime-age women of all levels of education grew strongly during the post-pandemic 
recovery and peaked last year. This has led to a historically narrow EPOP ratio gap between prime-
age men and women. The increase in the EPOP ratio for women most likely reﬂ ects the continua-
tion of the pre-pandemic trend of rising female labor force participation—some of which is likely 
attributable to increased educational attainment—among other factors. More recently, EPOP ratios 
for women have diverged across education levels (ﬁ gure A, right panel). Although the EPOP ratio for 
women with some college education or more has remained near its historical peak in the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve 
months of this year, the EPOP ratio for women with a high school education or less has moved down 
and now stands near its average level in 2019 (mostly reﬂ ecting a decline in labor force participation

3 As monthly series have greater sampling variability for smaller groups, we do not plot EPOP ratio estimates for American 
Indians or Alaska Natives.

Across all prime-age people, the aggregate EPOP ratio has edged down from its peak late last year, 
likely owing in part to the lagged effects of an easing labor market on individuals’ labor force partic-
ipation decisions (ﬁ gure B).4 The EPOP ratio for people aged 55 or older has been moving gradually 
lower, on net, in recent years and now stands almost 3 percentage points below its 2019 average. 
Most of this shortfall reﬂ ects retirements related to the aging of the baby-boom generation. As this 
cohort has grown older, the median age of people in the aged 55 or older population has risen, and 
because older workers are more likely to have retired, this has lowered the group’s average EPOP ratio. 
Further, workers in this group, particularly those aged 65 or older, began retiring somewhat earlier than 
usual during the pandemic, which has put some additional downward pressure on their EPOP ratio.5

Although employment disparities across many demographic groups are still near the historical lows 
reached during the post-pandemic recovery period, substantial gender, racial, ethnic, and geographic 
gaps in levels remain. For example, prime-age women are currently employed at a rate about 11 per-
centage points less than men, while prime-age Black and Hispanic workers are employed at a rate 
3 to 5 percentage points less than white workers, largely reﬂ ecting long-standing structural factors.

Like employment, nominal wage growth has cooled a bit further over the past year as the labor mar-
ket has come into better balance. Even so, with headline inﬂ ation declining, these nominal wage 
gains have translated into solid real wage increases for most groups. Earlier in the current expansion, 
the exceptionally tight labor market led to comparatively robust wage growth for lower-wage workers 
and historically disadvantaged groups. As shown in the top-left panel of ﬁ gure C, real wage growth—
as measured by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker and deﬂ ated by the per-
sonal consumption expenditures price index—was generally stronger for workers in the bottom half 
of the income distribution during the post-pandemic recovery through early 2024. This pattern was 
largely the result of labor demand outpacing labor supply in lower-wage service industries during the

economic reopening, together with strong wage growth for job switchers, who tended to be relatively 
low-wage workers.6 Since late last year, however, real wage growth for workers in the bottom quartile 
of earners has fallen below that of workers in other earnings quartiles but remains relatively robust.7

This pattern in wage growth across the income distribution is reﬂ ected in the experiences of different 
demographic and education groups. Wage growth for nonwhite workers was generally stronger than that 
for white workers from 2022 through mid-2024 but has been similar for these groups in recent months 
(ﬁ gure C, top-right panel). Similarly, wage growth for workers with a high school diploma or less was 
strong relative to other groups in the tight post-pandemic labor market; however, as labor market con-
ditions softened, wage growth for this group fell below that for college-educated workers in early 2024 
and has edged down a bit further since the middle of last year (ﬁ gure C, bottom-left panel). Finally, 
wages for men and women largely grew in tandem until the middle of last year, but real wage growth for 
women has been a bit stronger than that for men since mid-2024 (ﬁ gure C, bottom-right panel).

June, other more timely indicators point to a

sharp slowdown in immigration and popula-

The labor market appears to be about in balance

As labor demand has gradually eased over the past few years, a variety of measures suggest the

labor market has moved into balance and is now less tight than just before the pandemic. For

example, the gap between the total number of available jobs (measured by employed workers plus

Labor productivity has increased at a robust pace, with significant volatility

the fourth quarter of 2019 is estimated to

have increased 1.8 percent per year, 0.3 per-

centage point faster than the average pace

that prevailed over the previous business

Note: The data are output per hour in the 
business sector.

cycle between the fourth quarters of 2007

6 The productivity calculation for the first quarter of 2025 may have been distorted by measurement issues in GDP 
related to the surge in imports and the volatility of available data on inventory investment, which are discussed in 
more detail in the next section.

7 For some potential explanations for this faster productivity growth, see the box “Labor Productivity since the Start 
of the Pandemic” in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2025), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: 
Board of Governors, February), pp. 18–20, https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/20250207_
mprfullreport.pdf.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
17

Wage growth has slowed but remains solid

As labor market tightness has eased further

Figure 17. Measures of change in hourly 
compensation

this year, nominal wage growth has contin-

ued to slow but remains solid (figure 17).

Total hourly compensation for private-sector

Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker
Average hourly earnings, private sector
Employment cost index, private sector

cost index, increased 3.4 percent over the

12 months ending in March and has gradually

slowed from its peak increase of 5.5 percent

in mid-2022. Other measures of labor com-

pensation growth, such as average hourly

Note: For the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, the 
data are shown as a 3-month moving average of the 
12-month percent change; for private-sector average 
hourly earnings, the data are 12-month percent 
changes; for the private-sector employment cost 
index, change is over the 12 months ending in the 
last month of each quarter.

of compensation) and the Federal Reserve

Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker (which

reports the median 12-month wage growth of

individuals responding to the Current Popu-

lation Survey), have flattened out in recent

months but continued to slow over the past

Despite this slowing, wage growth this year remains somewhat above its 2019 pace, in contrast

with the indicators of labor market tightness that suggest the labor market is less tight this year

than it was in 2019. One factor that could explain this extra strength might be the higher average

With PCE prices having risen 2.1 percent during the 12 months through April, these wage meas­

ures suggest that most workers saw increases in the purchasing power of their wages over

the past year. That said, the extent of these increases depends in part on workers’ individual

circumstances—because nominal wage changes vary significantly across industry and occupation

and because households consume different baskets of goods than the one represented in the

aggregate PCE price index. (For details on how real wage gains have differed across demographic

Gross domestic product edged down in the first quarter, but growth in private 
domestic demand remained solid

After having increased at a solid pace last year, real GDP is reported to have edged down at an

ures the value of U.S. production from the flow of income it generates, declined slightly in the

first quarter following robust growth last year (figure 18).

Although some of the pause in GDP growth in

the first quarter reflects a decline in federal

government purchases, most of it is due to

a historic surge in imports that likely reflects

a pull-forward of purchases of goods from

abroad by households and businesses ahead

of expected increases in tariffs. Imports

flows in the GDP calculation to isolate the

although it is possible that U.S. output

declined in the first quarter while imports

surged, it appears likely that reported GDP

growth was understated. Specifically, the full

increase in inventories owing to the surge in

imports may not have been captured in the inventory source data.8 Moreover, the decline in GDP

is at odds with other indicators of economic activity, including measures from the labor market

ISM manufacturing
Average of regional Fed surveys

rials and supplies. This pattern suggests

that producers may have pulled forward the

production of inputs that are combined with

imported inputs. Production then declined in

April and May, on average, consistent with the

net deterioration observed this year in manu-

facturing new orders and measures of senti-

ment in the sector, reflecting concerns that

tariff increases will raise input costs, reduce

exports, and lead to supply chain disruptions

8 Consistent with this view, the Bureau of Economic Analysis noted in the technical notes to the April 30 and May 29 
GDP releases that adjustments were made to inventories in March, as some of the surge in imports was apparently 
not reflected in Census Bureau book-value inventories. However, the boost to total inventory investment from these ad 
hoc adjustments was too small to fully offset the jump in total imports.

not an abrupt pause in growth. That said, while this measure is usually considered a better

indicator of the underlying momentum in the economy than is GDP, some of its growth in the first

quarter appears to have reflected businesses pulling forward their investment spending ahead of

(figure 20). The step-down in growth this year may reflect payback from the exceptionally strong

growth in the second half of last year that was partly due to special factors.9 However, household

fundamentals have softened somewhat and are consistent with more moderate growth in spend-

ing this year than last year. For example, growth in real disposable personal income has moder-

ated further this year as job gains slowed, following very strong average growth of 3.5 percent per

been little changed, on net, since early last year, as weak house price growth has begun to weigh

on the ratio, while swings in equity prices have caused it to fluctuate. The saving rate—the differ-

More broadly, household balance sheets and finances appear to have largely returned to more

normal levels this year, after having been bolstered during and after the pandemic by large fiscal

transfers, the very tight labor market, and sizable increases in home and equity prices. The

9 Consumer spending growth was boosted in the fourth quarter of last year by strong retail sales as well as some tem-
porary spending by nonprofits around the presidential election.

normalization of household balance sheets may suggest households are now less able to weather

adverse shocks than they were a few years ago.

depressing consumer sentiment further from

already low levels (figure 22). However, the

continuing a pattern from the past few years,

consumer spending has been more resilient

early this year than measures of consumer

Consumer financing conditions remain somewhat restrictive

Consumer financing conditions have remained

somewhat restrictive this year, although

financing has generally remained available to

support spending for most households, other

than those with low credit scores. However,

growth in credit card and auto loan balances

slowed slightly, on balance, during the first

four months of this year relative to last year,

partly reflecting borrowing costs that are still

high and lending standards at commercial

According to the April 2025 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices

(SLOOS), conducted by the Federal Reserve Board, the level of lending standards at banks is

estimated to have been tight, on balance, despite some net easing reported during the first quar-

ter of this year.10 For auto loans and credit cards, tight lending standards likely reflect, in part,

delinquency rates that have remained somewhat elevated relative to the pre-pandemic period,

although delinquency rates for credit cards edged down in the fourth quarter of last year and the

first quarter of this year. Also weighing on the credit access of some borrowers are the sharp

10 These results reported from the SLOOS are based on banks’ responses weighted by each bank’s outstanding loans 
in the respective loan category, and they might therefore differ from the published SLOOS results (which are based on 
banks’ unweighted responses).

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
21

declines in credit scores associated with the resumption of the reporting of student loan delin-

quencies to credit bureaus after the expiration of the on-ramp period.11

Residential investment growth has slowed this year

After rising moderately in 2024, residen-

tial investment has leveled off this year, as

mortgage interest rates have flattened out at

levels much higher than before and during the

pandemic, and measures of builder sentiment

have declined markedly on rising inventories

of unsold homes under construction as well

as concerns about rising costs from tariffs