The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory man-

date from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-

term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public

as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and

businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of mone-

tary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic

Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic

and financial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy

in response to these disturbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of

monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee

judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price

stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal

funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past.

Owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges

that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to

use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals.

The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly mea-

surable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and

dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for

employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the

shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are neces-

sarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in

The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the

Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its

judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price

index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the

Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expecta-

tions that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest

rates and enhance the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of

significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this

level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and there-

fore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent,

appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for

Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In

setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from

the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run

goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a sta-

ble financial system. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its

medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial

system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.

The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However,

under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it

takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different

time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consis-

The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its

annual organizational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough

public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.

backed securities. The FOMC is strongly committed to supporting maximum employment and

returning inflation to its 2 percent objective, and it remains attentive to the risks to both sides

of its dual mandate. In considering the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target

range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving

Inflation. After stepping down notably in 2023, consumer price inflation eased a bit more last

year, although recent progress has been bumpy and inflation remains somewhat above 2 per-

index—which excludes often-volatile food and energy prices and is generally considered a better

guide to the future of inflation—rose 2.8 percent last year, only a little less than its increase

in 2023, as core services price inflation remained elevated. However, some other approaches

to removing the influence of volatile components of inflation, such as the trimmed mean PCE

The labor market. The labor market remains solid and appears to have stabilized after a period of

after, ending the year at 4.1 percent—still low by historical standards—while job vacancies, which

had been trending down, also flattened out over the second half at a solid level. As labor demand

cooled somewhat further last year, monthly job gains slowed to a moderate pace on average.

Labor supply likely increased less robustly than in previous years, with immigration appearing to

have slowed over the second half of last year. Given the further rebalancing of labor demand and

supply last year, the labor market no longer appears especially tight. Reflecting this further bal-

ancing, nominal wage gains continued to slow in 2024 and are now closer to the pace consistent

with 2 percent inflation over the longer term.

than in 2023. Consumer spending continued to grow robustly, supported by a solid labor market

and rising real wages, while real business fixed investment increased moderately. In the housing

market, new home construction was solid but existing home sales remained depressed, with

mortgage rates still elevated. In contrast to GDP, manufacturing output was little changed, in part

reflecting weak production in interest-sensitive sectors.

Financial conditions. Financial conditions continue to appear to be somewhat restrictive on

balance. Short-term Treasury yields declined, in line with the easing of monetary policy since

September; however, the market-implied path for the federal funds rate over the next year shifted

up notably, and long-term Treasury yields increased markedly in the fourth quarter. Broad equity

prices continued to increase despite the rise in longer-term Treasury yields, and yields on corpo-

rate bonds were little changed, as spreads narrowed. Credit continued to be broadly available to

large-to-midsize businesses, most households, and municipalities but remained relatively tight for

small businesses and households with lower credit scores. Bank lending to households and busi-

nesses continued to decelerate in the second half of 2024, likely reflecting still-elevated interest

Financial stability. The financial system remains sound and resilient. Valuations remained high

relative to fundamentals in a range of markets, including those for equity, corporate debt, and

residential real estate. Total debt of households and nonfinancial businesses as a fraction of

GDP continued to trend down to a level that is very low relative to that in the past two decades.

Most banks continued to report capital levels well above regulatory requirements and have

reduced their reliance on uninsured deposits, but fair value losses on fixed-rate assets were still

sizable for some banks. In terms of funding risks, while the 2023–24 Securities and Exchange

Commission reforms on money market funds (MMFs) have partially mitigated vulnerabilities of

prime MMFs, other less regulated short-term investment vehicles remain vulnerable and some-

what opaque, and their assets have been growing. Meanwhile, hedge fund leverage appears to be

high and concentrated. (See the box “Developments Related to Financial Stability.”)

International developments. Foreign growth remained modest in the second half of 2024. For-

eign manufacturing in general was weak, as the cumulative effects of restrictive monetary policy

weighed on the sector and, in Europe, energy-intensive industries continued to grapple with ele-

vated energy costs. That said, high-tech manufacturing and exports remained strong in Asia on

robust U.S. artificial intelligence (AI) and data center demand. In China, while exports were strong,

domestic demand remained sluggish despite stimulus measures to shore up the ailing property

sector. Meanwhile, foreign headline inflation continued to decline, but progress on inflation reduc-

Many foreign central banks cut policy rates further since mid-2024, citing declining inflationary

pressures, easing labor markets, and concerns about economic growth. Policymakers generally

stressed the importance of maintaining vigilance amid persistent geopolitical risks and, in some

economies, still-somewhat-elevated services inflation and wage pressures. Since mid-2024, the

trade-weighted exchange value of the U.S. dollar has increased significantly, on net, reflecting

widening gaps of U.S. interest rates over those of major advanced foreign economies, the relative

strength of the U.S. economy, and political and fiscal developments in some foreign economies.

Interest rate policy. After having held the target range for the policy rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent

between late July 2023 and mid-September 2024, the FOMC lowered the target range for the

policy rate by a cumulative 100 basis points over its September, November, and December

meetings, bringing it to the current range of 4¼ to 4½ percent. The FOMC’s decision to begin

reducing the degree of policy restraint reflected the FOMC’s greater confidence in inflation moving

sustainably toward 2 percent and the judgment that it was appropriate to recalibrate the policy

stance. The FOMC remains attentive to the risks to both sides of its dual mandate. In considering

the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the

Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.

Balance sheet policy. The Federal Reserve has continued the process of significantly reducing its

holdings of Treasury and agency securities in a predictable manner. Beginning in June 2022, prin-

cipal payments from securities held in the System Open Market Account have been reinvested

only to the extent that they exceeded monthly caps. Under this policy, the Federal Reserve has

reduced its securities holdings by $297 billion since June 2024, bringing the total reduction in

securities holdings since the start of balance sheet reduction to about $2 trillion. The FOMC has

stated that it intends to maintain securities holdings at amounts consistent with implementing

monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample-reserves regime. To ensure a smooth tran-

sition, the FOMC slowed the pace of decline of its securities holdings in June 2024 and intends

to stop reductions in its securities holdings when reserve balances are somewhat above the level

that the FOMC judges to be consistent with ample reserves.

Employment and earnings across groups. The tight labor market in recent years has been espe-

cially beneficial for historically disadvantaged groups of workers, and many of the disparities in

employment and wages by sex, race, ethnicity, education, and geography have narrowed. Over the

past year, even as labor market conditions have eased, employment disparities continue to be

near their recent lows, while wage growth has remained solid across many groups despite slow-

annual pace over the previous expansion. Should this faster pace of productivity growth persist,

it can support stronger GDP growth without adding inflationary pressure. Some factors that have

boosted productivity growth recently may continue providing support, such as new business for-

mation, which surged early into the pandemic and has remained strong. Other factors may have

had more short-lived influences on productivity growth, including a temporary burst in worker

reallocation across jobs earlier in the pandemic. Any measured productivity gains from integration

of AI technologies into production processes have likely been small so far, but productivity gains

may grow as AI use becomes more widespread. (See the box “Labor Productivity since the Start

est rate in response to the behavior of a small number of economic variables, can provide useful

within the current target range. (See the box “Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment.”)

Recent Economic and Financial 
Developments

Inflation eased a little further last year

After stepping down notably in 2023, inflation moderated a little further last year, although it

remains somewhat elevated. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose

2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in December, down slightly from its 2.7 percent pace

the previous year and well below its peak of 7.2 percent in mid-2022. Thus, inflation has moved

closer to—although still somewhat above—the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC)

longer-run objective of 2 percent (figure 1). Progress on disinflation last year was bumpy, with

both total PCE prices and core PCE prices—which exclude often-volatile food and energy prices

and are generally considered a better guide to the future of inflation—showing firmer monthly

price increases over the first quarter of last year and more moderate price gains thereafter. For

2024 as a whole, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent—a little less than the 3.0 percent gain over

the previous year. However, some alternative measures that attempt to reduce the influence of

idiosyncratic price movements showed more marked disinflation. For example, the trimmed mean

measure of PCE prices constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas increased 2.8 percent

over the 12 months ending in December, a noticeable step-down from its 3.3 percent increase

Figure 1. Personal consumption expenditures price indexes

Trimmed mean
Total
Excluding food and energy

Note: The horizontal line indicates the Federal Open Market Committee’s objective of 2 percent.

Consumer energy prices declined last year, while food prices increased modestly

PCE energy prices fell a modest 1.1 percent over the 12 months ending in December, as oil

prices moved a little lower over 2024 (figure 2, left panel). The decline in oil prices was par-

tially due to tepid oil demand from China and rising production in the U.S. and other non-OPEC

Figure 2. Price indexes for subcomponents of personal consumption expenditures

Housing services
Services ex. energy and housing
Goods ex. food, beverages, and energy

Food and beverages (right scale)
Energy (left scale)

Note: Percent change is from year earlier.

(Organization of the Petroleum Exporting

Figure 3. Spot and futures prices for crude oil

Countries) members; the effect of these fac-

tors more than offset upward price pressure

from sustained geopolitical tension, including

colder-than-expected weather and news of

stricter sanctions on Russian oil exports. Con-

tinuing geopolitical tensions remain an upside

prices surged in response to bird flu-related

supply disruptions, while price increases

Prices of both energy and food products are

of particular importance for lower-income

Reflecting the sharp increases seen in 2021 and 2022, these price indexes remain around

In assessing the outlook for inflation, it remains helpful to consider three separate components

of core prices: core goods, housing services, and core nonhousing services (figure 2, right panel).

Price changes for core goods appear to have nearly normalized, with core goods prices declin-

ing slightly last year at a pace that was just a little slower than the average annual decline that

prevailed in the years before the pandemic. The movement toward pre-pandemic conditions for

this category of inflation in part reflects the resolution of supply chain issues and other supply

constraints that had boosted goods prices earlier, and supply–demand conditions in goods mar-

kets now appear to be relatively balanced. As one indication, the shares of respondents to the

for operating below capacity have returned close to their pre-pandemic levels (figure 5). Core

goods inflation received a small boost last year from price gains in nonfuel import prices, which

. . . while housing services price inflation moved lower last year but remains 
elevated . . .

Housing services price inflation continued moderating last year, with prices rising 4.7 percent over

Despite this moderation, housing services inflation remains notably above its pre-pandemic level.

Housing services inflation tends to respond with a lag to movements in rents for new leases to

new tenants (“market rents”), and as these market rents have largely returned to pre-pandemic

rates of increase, housing services inflation will likely continue to move lower as well (figure 7).2

. . . and core nonhousing services price inflation has flattened out at a 
somewhat elevated level

medical, travel and dining, and financial services—increased 3.5 percent last year, a bit above

their increase in 2023 and their pre-pandemic pace. However, the lack of further progress in this

category masks important heterogeneity within its components. For the “market-based” category

increased 2.9 percent last year—similar to its pre-pandemic pace and slower than its 3.5 percent

lodging that are more directly influenced by supply–demand conditions, so easing in the labor

market has likely contributed to the ongoing deceleration in this category of prices. In contrast,

Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been stable, while shorter-
term expectations generally moved down a bit last year

A generally held view among economists is that inflation expectations influence actual inflation

by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. Measures of inflation expectations over a longer

2 Because prices for housing services measure the rents paid by all tenants (and the equivalent rent implicitly paid by 
all homeowners)—including those whose leases have not recently come up for renewal—they tend to adjust slowly to 
changes in rental market conditions.

ers) and professional forecasters have remained broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run

2 percent inflation objective (figure 8). Over the past year, these measures have been little

changed and within the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. For example, the median

broadly in line with readings seen in the years before the pandemic and consistent with PCE infla-

Survey-based inflation expectations over a shorter horizon—which tend to follow observed

Consumer Expectations are in line with pre-pandemic levels.

The labor market remains in solid shape. At the end of the year, the unemployment rate was low

. . . with labor market conditions appearing to stabilize over the second half of 
last year after a period of easing

still low by historical standards (figure 10).

ment rates moved up, on net, last year, but to

4 While job openings might be above pre-pandemic levels because labor demand is stronger than in that period, it might 
instead, at least in part, reflect changes in firms’ job-posting behavior. For example, some firms might be more willing 
than they were pre-pandemic to post openings that they are unsure they might fill, because they experienced severe 
labor shortages and hiring difficulties earlier in the pandemic and want to avoid a similar situation.

Economic expansions have tended to narrow long-standing disparities in employment and earnings 
across demographic groups, which can help make up for disproportionate losses experienced during 
downturns. These beneﬁ ts have been evident during the expansion in recent years as an exception-
ally tight labor market has allowed gaps between groups to narrow signiﬁ cantly. Over the past year, 
even as labor market conditions have eased, employment disparities continue to be near their recent 
lows, while wage growth has remained solid across many groups despite slowing a bit from post-
pandemic highs. However, despite the progress in recent years, signiﬁ cant disparities in absolute 
levels across groups remain.

Among prime-age people (aged 25 to 54), employment for Black or African American workers remains 
relatively high. The employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio for this group increased from mid-2020 
until 2023 and has been mostly ﬂ at, on net, near its historical peak since then (ﬁ gure A, left panel). 
This movement, combined with relatively smaller increases in the EPOP ratio for white workers over 
the same period, led the gap between the EPOP ratios for Blacks and whites to fall to its lowest point 
in 50 years. Over the past year, as the labor market has eased, this gap appears to have widened 
slightly but remains near its historical low.1 Employment for Hispanic or Latino workers has also 
remained quite strong, with an EPOP ratio close to its historical high. As a result, the gap between 
the EPOP ratios between this group and white workers is also near its narrowest point. The EPOP 
ratio for prime-age Asian workers remains high as well, sitting slightly below its historical peak.2

Similarly, the EPOP ratio for prime-age women of all levels of education grew strongly in the post-
pandemic recovery, surpassing its pre-pandemic level, and peaked last year. The increase in the 
EPOP ratio among this group most likely reﬂ ects both the continuation of the pre-pandemic trend of 
rising female labor force participation—some of which is likely attributable to increased educational

attainment—and the continuing availability of remote work.3 In contrast, the EPOP ratio for prime-
age men has remained mostly ﬂ at near 2019 levels over the past several years, and, as a result, 
the male–female EPOP ratio gap narrowed signiﬁ cantly to a record low. That said, the EPOP ratios 
for women by education level diverged a bit in the latter half of 2024 (ﬁ gure A, right panel). While the 
EPOP ratio for college-educated women remained well above 2019 levels through the second half of 
last year, that for non-college-educated women moved closer to 2019 levels, reﬂ ecting both a small 
decline in labor force participation and a small increase in unemployment.

Like the experiences of women and minority workers, employment for prime-age people living 
outside of large metropolitan areas also especially beneﬁ ted from the economic expansion of 
recent years. While the EPOP ratios for workers in all areas increased over this period, those for 
rural areas (“nonmetros”) and smaller cities have been particularly strong (ﬁ gure B, top panel).4 As 
a result, and given that EPOP ratios are relatively low in rural areas, the gap between EPOP ratios 
for workers in larger cities and those for workers in rural areas has declined over the past sev-
eral years and now sits 1 percentage point below its 2019 average. The EPOP ratio gap between 
smaller and larger cities also dropped below its pre-pandemic level during this period; however, as 
the labor market has rebalanced over the past year, this gap appears to have widened back to its 
2019 level. Interestingly, the employment gains for workers in rural areas and smaller cities dif-
fered signiﬁ cantly by education level. In rural areas, employment for non-college-educated workers 
increased by more than for similarly educated workers in cities (ﬁ gure B, bottom-left panel). In con-
trast, employment for college-educated workers increased relatively more in smaller cities than in 
either of the other areas (ﬁ gure B, bottom-right panel).

While employment disparities across many demographic groups are within range of historical lows 
reached during the post-pandemic recovery period, substantial gender, racial, ethnic, and geographic 
gaps remain, underscoring long-standing structural factors. Currently, prime-age women are employed 
at a rate 11 percentage points less than men, while prime-age Black and Hispanic workers are 
employed at a rate 3 to 4 percentage points less than white workers. Further, workers in rural areas 
are employed at a rate 1 to 3 percentage points below workers in cities.

Similar to employment, a solid but cooling labor market has supported nominal wage growth over 
the past year—albeit at a slower pace than that during the exceptionally tight labor market in the 
previous two years. Even so, with headline inﬂ ation declining, these wage gains imply continued 
solid increases in real wages across many groups. In recent years, real wage growth was particularly 
robust for lower-wage workers and for many historically disadvantaged groups; however, by the end 
of 2024, wage growth for these groups had moderated. As shown in the top-left panel of ﬁ gure C, 
real wage growth—as measured by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Growth Tracker and 
deﬂ ated by the personal consumption expenditures price index—was relatively strong for workers in 
the bottom half of the income distribution during the post-pandemic recovery through the ﬁ rst half of

This pattern in wage growth across the income distribution is reﬂ ected in the experiences of different 
demographic groups. Wage growth for nonwhite workers had been a bit stronger than that for white 
workers since 2022 but, by mid-2024, had fallen to a similar rate of growth (ﬁ gure C, top-right panel). 
Similarly, wage growth for workers with a high school diploma or less was strong relative to other 
groups in the post-pandemic tight labor market; however, as labor market conditions softened in 
2024, wage growth for this group tapered and fell below that for college-educated workers (ﬁ gure C, 
bottom-left panel). In contrast, wages for men and women largely grew in tandem until the middle of 
last year, but real wage growth for women outpaced a bit that for men by the end of 2024 (ﬁ gure C, 
bottom-right panel).

governments (where employment levels have

been normalizing toward pre-pandemic trends

after earlier staffing shortages), but employ-

demand last year manifested as a slowdown

in hiring rather than an increase in layoffs. Indeed, many hiring indicators, such as the hiring

rate from the JOLTS and the rate at which unemployed individuals became employed each month

from the Current Population Survey, moved lower last year. In contrast, layoffs indicators, such

as initial claims for unemployment insurance and the layoffs rate from JOLTS, were mostly little

changed and have remained low (figure 13).

5 Job growth last year has likely been somewhat less strong than currently reported in the Current Employment Sta-
tistics (CES), as suggested by the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) preliminary benchmark revision to the CES and 
administrative data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW). The CES payroll data will be revised 
with the release of the January employment report on February 7, when the BLS will benchmark payroll estimates to 
employment counts from the QCEW as part of its annual benchmarking process. Should payroll gains be downwardly 
revised as suggested by these indicators, payroll employment gains would then be more consistent with the edging up 
of the unemployment rate last year.

Increases in labor supply appear to have slowed

At the same time, the supply of labor—determined by both the LFPR (the share of the population

either working or seeking work) and population growth—appears to have increased more slowly

over the second half of last year, after substantial increases over the past several years.

After having rebounded notably from its pan-

demic lows, the LFPR has been little changed

December (figure 14). Although population

aging has continued to put downward pres-

sure on the LFPR, this influence has been

offset by increasing participation among

some age groups. In particular, the LFPR

substantially over the past few years (espe-

cially among women) and, despite declining a

bit, on net, over the second half of last year,

recent indicators point to a sharp slowdown in immigration and population growth since the mid-

The labor market no longer appears especially tight

closer alignment. By many measures, the labor market appears somewhat less tight than just

(but still low relative to its range over the past 50 years).

Labor productivity increased solidly in 2024

Productivity growth has swung wildly since the

the fourth quarter of 2019 is estimated to

have increased 1.8 percent, 0.3 percent-

age point faster than the average pace that

prevailed over the previous expansion.8 (For

some potential explanations for this faster

Note: The data are output per hour in the business 
sector.

productivity growth, see the box “Labor Pro-

ductivity since the Start of the Pandemic.”)

8 Productivity estimates can be subject to large revisions. For example, the anticipated downward revisions to payroll 
employment discussed in footnote 5 would likely imply a small upward revision to currently published productivity 
growth. Revisions to gross domestic product estimates, in either direction, could also have a substantial effect on 
measured productivity.

box 2. Labor Productivity since the Start of the Pandemic

While labor productivity in the business sector has been volatile since the start of the pandemic, 
smoothing through these swings, productivity has increased at an average annual rate of 1.8 percent 
from 2019:Q4 to 2024:Q4—stronger than its 1.5 percent annual average pace over the previous 
business cycle, 2007:Q4 to 2019:Q4 (ﬁ gure A). This relatively strong growth rate has put the level 
of productivity more than 1½ percent above where it would have been had it increased at its pre-
pandemic pace. Should stronger productivity growth be maintained, it would have important economic 
consequences, because stronger productivity growth can support stronger growth in gross domestic 
product and real wages without additional inﬂ ationary pressure.

Productivity
Productivity, assuming pre-pandemic growth rate

2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024

Note: The data are output per hour in the business sector. The blue line plots output per hour, assuming a 
constant growth rate equal to its average from 2007:Q4 to 2019:Q4. The shaded bars with top caps indicate 
periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research: December 2007 to 
June 2009 and February 2020 to April 2020.

Why has productivity growth been stronger than its pre-pandemic pace? One key contributing factor 
has likely been new business formation, which surged early in the pandemic and remains strong 
(ﬁ gure B). This strength has likely supported productivity growth because newer ﬁ rms are more likely 
to adopt new technologies or production processes, use existing processes more efﬁ ciently, or create 
new products themselves.1 Moreover, the surge in business formation has been disproportionately 
concentrated in high-tech industries, which historically have been important drivers of productivity 
gains.2 As some of the more productive businesses started over the past few years grow further, they

1 Although the latest data on new establishment formation is available only through 2024:Q2, new business applications—
many of which lead to new businesses forming—remained high through 2024:Q4, suggesting that new businesses continued 
to be created at a strong pace throughout the second half of last year. For evidence that newer businesses have historically 
been an important driver of productivity gains, see Titan Alon, David Berger, Robert Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley (2018), 
“Older and Slower: The Startup Deficit’s Lasting Effects on Aggregate Productivity Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 
vol. 93 (January), pp. 68–85. For some evidence that the surge in business formation from the past few years has featured 
genuine new entrepreneurial activity (rather than only reflecting, for example, a surge in gig work or in new establishments 
among incumbent firms), see Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger (2023), “Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: 
Causes and Consequences?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 249–302, https://www.brookings.edu/
wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Decker-Haltiwanger_16820-BPEA-FA23_WEB.pdf; and Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger 
(2024), “Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: A Brief Update,” working paper, September.

2 See Ryan Decker and John Haltiwanger (2024), “High Tech Business Entry in the Pandemic Era,” FEDS Notes (Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 19), https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/
high-tech-business-entry-in-the-pandemic-era-20240419.html.

Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
19

may continue to support strong productivity growth, even if the rate of business formation slows. That 
said, much is still unknown about the nature and growth prospects of these pandemic-era new busi-
nesses, so there is considerable uncertainty around how much these businesses have contributed to 
recent productivity growth and how consequential they will be to productivity going forward.

Other contributing factors may have provided a more short-lived boost to productivity growth. For 
example, some ﬁ rms facing severe labor shortages early in the pandemic likely expanded their use 
of labor-saving technologies and more efﬁ ciently restructured aspects of production, which enhanced 
their workers’ productivity and reduced some ﬁ rms’ need for pre-pandemic levels of labor. However, 
as labor supply has gradually returned, ﬁ rms’ need for further expansion of labor-saving technologies 
may have diminished.

Another temporary factor has likely been worker reallocation across jobs (ﬁ gure C). Measures of 
worker reallocation, such as the rate of transitions between jobs (black line) and quits (blue line), 
jumped early in the pandemic and may have resulted in more productive matches between some 
workers and jobs.3 However, these measures have returned to pre-pandemic levels (or lower), so 
worker reallocation is unlikely to still be providing much support to productivity growth.

Figure b. Establishment births and new 
business applications

Figure C. Measures of worker reallocation

Changing jobs since last month (right scale)
JOLTS, total quits rate (left scale)

New establishments (BED)
New business applications

Note: Quarterly new business applications are 
the sum of high-propensity applications over the 
month. The Business Employment Dynamics 
(BED) data extend through 2024:Q2. The shaded 
bar with a top cap indicates a period of business 
recession as defined by the National Bureau 
of Economic Research: February 2020 to 
April 2020.

Note: The data are seasonally adjusted quarterly 
averages. The black line applies only to persons 
aged 16 or older. JOLTS is the Job Openings and 
Labor Turnover Survey.

3 For evidence that job-to-job movements have historically been an important contributor to productivity gains, see John Halti-
wanger, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, and Matthew Staiger (2025), “Cyclical Worker Flows: Cleansing vs. Sullying,” Review of 
Economic Dynamics, vol. 55 (January), 101252. For evidence suggesting that the recent period of elevated worker reallocation 
may have been productivity enhancing because it in part reflected transitions from lower-wage (lower-productivity) jobs to 
higher-wage (higher-productivity) jobs, see David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023), “The Unexpected Compres-
sion: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market,” NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National 
Bureau of Economic Research, March; revised May 2024), https://www.nber.org/papers/w31010.

Finally, integration of artiﬁ cial intelligence (AI) into production processes may already be contributing 
to productivity gains. However, any effects on measured productivity so far have probably been small, 
since it will likely take many ﬁ rms some time to ﬁ gure out how to effectively integrate AI into the 
workplace.4 As AI becomes more widely adopted and more efﬁ ciently used, it may contribute more 
substantially to productivity, although there are conﬂ icting views about any potential economic impli-
cations.5

It seems possible that all of the aforementioned factors have contributed, at least to some degree, 
to the strength in productivity since the start of the pandemic, although it is difﬁ cult to separate out 
their relative contributions. Going forward, whether productivity growth can remain above its pre-
pandemic pace depends in part on how persistent the inﬂ uence of some of these factors proves to 
be and whether these or other factors become even more consequential (for example, how much fur-
ther AI technologies develop and how widespread their usage becomes).

Wage growth has slowed but remains solid

solid pace (figure 17). Total hourly compen-

(a less comprehensive measure) slowing in

Despite this slowing, wage growth remains somewhat above its 2019 pace. This contrasts with

the normalization in other labor market tightness indicators cited earlier and might reflect per-

sistence in the adjustment process of wages to earlier shocks as well as support from strong pro-

ductivity growth. Nominal wage growth may still remain somewhat too high to be consistent with

2 percent inflation over time, although this depends in part on how persistent the recent strength

With PCE prices having risen 2.6 percent last year, these wage measures suggest that most

workers saw increases in the purchasing power of their wages in 2024. That said, the extent of

these increases depends in part on workers’ individual circumstances—because nominal wage

changes vary significantly across industry and occupation and because households consume

different baskets of goods than the one represented in the aggregate PCE price index. (For details

Gross domestic product rose solidly last year

Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have increased at a solid annual rate of

2.7 percent over the second half of last year, a little stronger than its pace over the first half

(figure 18). GDP growth last year was impor-

tantly supported by strength in consumer

spending. Meanwhile, business investment

grew moderately, while activity in the hous-

ing market was lackluster. For the year, GDP

than its 3.2 percent pace from 2023, primar-

ily because of moderation in both state and

local government spending and nonresidential

structures investment (which surged in 2023

from booming construction of manufactur-

ing facilities), and more of a drag from net

exports (as imports grew faster than exports).

In contrast to GDP, manufacturing output was little changed last year. In part, weakness in man-

ufacturing production reflects tight financing conditions, as manufacturing output was weaker, on

average, in sectors that tend to be more responsive to interest rates. Moreover, recent growth in

domestic goods spending has largely been accommodated by increased imports. Special factors

also held down production in some key industries like aircraft, where a labor dispute held down

output. In all, manufacturing output has been fairly flat in recent years and remains below its

Consumer spending has been resilient despite some headwinds

Despite headwinds from high interest rates,

grew a strong 3.2 percent last year, a little

spending has been supported by a still-solid

labor market, high levels of household wealth

relative to income, and rising real wages—

over the past two years. However, consum-

pace of spending in part by drawing down

their stock of liquid assets (such as checking

and savings accounts) that had accumulated

to elevated levels during and after the pan-

demic and by relying more on credit. Even so,

households’ stock of liquid assets appears

to have stabilized at a solid level somewhat

above its pre-pandemic trend, suggesting

that households, in the aggregate, may have

a larger-than-usual buffer to weather eco-

than measures of consumer sentiment would

suggest (figure 21). Although sentiment in the

Michigan survey measure, as it puts more

Consumer financing conditions remain somewhat restrictive

Despite a tick down in interest rates over the second half of the year in many categories of con-

sumer loans, consumer financing conditions have remained restrictive, reflecting still-high bor-

rowing costs and tight bank lending standards. According to the October 2024 and January 2025

credit cards, the relatively tight consumer lending standards likely reflect, in part, delinquency

rates that have remained somewhat elevated relative to the pre-pandemic period.

year, supported by solid income growth and