So far, so good. The world economy appears to be finally leaving behind the legacy 
of the Covid-19 pandemic and the commodity price shock of the war in Ukraine. The 
worst fears did not materialise. On balance, globally, inflation is continuing to decline 
towards targets, economic activity and the financial system have proved remarkably 
resilient, and both professional forecasters and financial market participants see a 
smooth landing ahead. This was by no means a given a year ago. It is a great outcome.

Still, there is a “but”. Challenges remain. The recent stickiness of inflation in some 
key jurisdictions reminds us that central banks’ job is not yet done. Financial 
vulnerabilities have not gone away. Fragile fiscal positions cast a shadow as far as the 
eye can see. Subdued productivity growth clouds economic prospects. Beyond the near 
term, laying a more solid foundation for the future is as difficult as ever. It could not be 
otherwise: it is an arduous task that requires a long-term view, courage and perseverance.

As is customary, this year’s Annual Economic Report (AER) takes the pulse of the 
global economy and explores policy challenges. It also devotes particular attention 
to two issues. Looking back, it reflects on the lessons learned so far from the conduct 
of monetary policy in the tumultuous first quarter of the 21st century. Looking 
forward, it examines the opportunities and risks associated with the rise of artificial 
intelligence (AI).

In the year under review, the global economy made further progress in absorbing 
the huge and long-lasting dislocations caused by the pandemic and Russia’s invasion 
of Ukraine.

Inflation has continued to decline from its peak in 2022. Both headline and core 
inflation kept moving down for much of the period under review. The rotation in the 
contribution to inflation from goods to services proceeded further, as commodity 
prices edged down while services price growth proved stickier. By the end of the 
period, inflation had come down substantially further: monetary policy had delivered 
(see below). At the same time, although it was more subdued in places, particularly 
in Asia, it was still hovering above central bank targets across much of the world. 
There were signs that the decline had become more hesitant in some key jurisdictions, 
notably the United States.

Economic activity held up surprisingly well, indicating that a “normalisation” in 
both demand and supply had helped disinflation. Employment remained unusually 
buoyant in relation to output, supporting demand further in the near term. 
Households again dipped into savings accumulated during the pandemic. The 
lingering effects of extraordinarily generous fiscal support, and in some cases 
additional fiscal expansion, boosted activity. Having borrowed at longer maturities 
and at fixed rates, households and firms were partly shielded from higher interest 
rates and the burden of debt.

The resilience of the financial system and financial market sentiment underpinned 
activity. There were no renewed serious banking strains à la March 2023. And while

banks were rather cautious in granting credit, conditions in financial markets remained 
quite easy. Equity prices rose, with those in the technology sector reaching heady 
heights, and bond spreads remained quite narrow by historical standards. For much of 
the period, buoyant investor sentiment reflected eager expectations of an immediate 
and substantial easing of monetary policy that did not materialise.

Against this backdrop, the most intense and synchronised monetary policy 
tightening in decades gave way to a somewhat more differentiated picture, in line 
with the growing differences in domestic inflation outlooks. Central banks prepared 
the ground for easing, for example in the euro area and much of Asia, or made the 
first cuts, such as in some countries in Latin America, where policy had been 
tightened ahead of the rest, and in Asia. The People’s Bank of China eased further in 
response to weak domestic conditions and given subdued inflation. In Japan, the 
central bank finally exited the negative interest rate policy era and abandoned yield 
curve control while retaining an accommodative stance.

This more differentiated picture has raised the prospect of larger interest rate 
differentials and pressures on currencies. In particular, following the latest monthly 
inflation readings in the United States, financial market participants expect greater 
divergence in policy rate trajectories, especially between the Federal Reserve and 
other central banks. This has reinforced a broad-based dollar appreciation, which has 
been especially marked vis-à-vis the yen. The appreciation has already elicited policy 
responses, including in some cases foreign exchange intervention or adjustments in 
the policy stance. And it has raised broader questions about the impact on capital 
flows and financial markets.

Looking ahead, the central scenario painted by professional forecasters and priced in 
financial markets is a smooth landing. Price stability is restored, economic growth 
picks up, central banks ease, and the financial system remains strain-free. Compared 
with past expectations, which were generally that a significant economic slowdown 
could be required to lower inflation, this is an impressive outcome. That said, risks 
persist. Some are more near-term, others further out. Some reflect an incomplete 
adjustment to the pandemic dislocations, others longer-standing weaknesses. To 
varying degrees, they all stem from the same root cause analysed in previous AERs: the 
pandemic hit a global economy that, while enjoying low inflation and growing briskly, 
had been relying for too long on an unsustainable debt-fuelled growth model. Hence 
worrying signs emerged, such as the historically high levels of private and public debt 
and the drastically reduced monetary and fiscal policy headroom.

Consider several pressure points pertaining to inflation, the macro-financial 
nexus and real economy factors, respectively. While somewhat arbitrary given the 
tight interconnections involved, this classification can help organise the discussion.

At the heart of the risks to inflation is the partial adjustment of two, closely 
related, relative prices thrown out of kilter by the pandemic. One is the price of 
services relative to that of (core) goods; the other is the price of labour (wages) 
relative to that of goods and services (the price level), ie real wages.

The pandemic-induced dislocations interrupted the secular increase in the price 
of services relative to that of goods. As demand rotated away from services to goods 
and clashed with inelastic supply, the price of goods rose by much more. And as 
demand subsequently rebounded strongly after having been first artificially suppressed 
by public health measures and then turbocharged by economic policies, its rotation 
back to services failed to re-establish the pre-pandemic relative price relationships 
even as services became the prime inflation driver. It is possible that the pandemic, 
and associated aggregate demand stimulus and supply disruptions, has permanently

altered the trend relative price relationship between goods and services. However, 
it is not clear why this should be the case, to the extent that the trend reflected 
deep-seated structural forces. These include a growing relative demand for services 
as incomes rise, slower productivity growth in services than in goods and nominal 
wage increases that do not compensate for the productivity growth rate differential 
in the two sectors. If the relative price between goods and services did return to its 
previous trend, it would raise overall inflation significantly above pre-pandemic rates 
for some time, unless disinflation in goods proceeded sufficiently fast, with prices 
growing below those rates. It might be hard for goods prices to grow that slowly in a 
world in which globalisation tailwinds are waning.

The pandemic-induced dislocations also interrupted the secular increase in real 
wages, as the surprising inflation flare-up eroded purchasing power. Real wages have 
recovered somewhat since then, but generally languish considerably below the 
previous trend. The shortfall could add to wage pressures ahead, especially given 
continued tightness in labour markets and sluggish productivity growth (see below). 
To the extent that profit margins have benefited from surprise inflation, there should 
be room for adjustment. But having regained a taste for pricing power during the 
inflation phase, firms might be tempted to use it again.

The two relative price adjustments are closely linked because the services sector 
is more labour-intensive. This is one reason why services price increases tend to be 
stickier than those of goods. And it helps to explain why the pass-through from 
wages to prices is much higher in this sector.

These incomplete relative price adjustments could provide fertile ground for 
other sources of inflationary pressures. Any commodity price spikes linked to, say, 
geopolitical tensions or the withdrawal of price subsidies would be more likely to 
trigger second-round effects. And the likelihood is higher following the long phase 
of above-target inflation, which can encourage and entrench inflation psychology.

Macro-financial pressure points reflect the combination of higher interest rates 
and financial vulnerabilities in private sector balance sheets in the form of high debt 
and stretched valuations. The current configuration is rather unique. The previous 
globally synchronised and intense monetary policy tightening took place during the 
Great Inflation era of the 1970s, when a repressed financial system had not allowed 
widespread vulnerabilities to develop (see previous AERs).

The outcome, so far, has been surprisingly benign, but tougher tests may lie 
ahead. The significant banking strains in March 2023 stemmed in many cases from 
the materialisation of interest rate risk alone, as higher interest rates shook valuations 
without causing borrowers to default. The materialisation of credit risk is still to come; 
the only question is when and how intense it will be. The lag is typically quite long, 
and yet it can appear deceptively short as memories fade. There are indications that 
financial cycles have started to turn. Savings buffers are dwindling. Debts will have to 
be refinanced.

Within this broad picture, specific macro-financial pressure points abound. There 
are those we know about. Commercial real estate, historically a much more typical 
source of banking stress than residential real estate, has been on supervisors’ radar 
screen for quite some time. The office segment, in particular, has fallen victim to the 
confluence of post-pandemic structural and cyclical forces. Similarly, the opaque risks 
in the burgeoning private credit markets have attracted considerable attention. And 
then there are certainly vulnerabilities we know far less about. They could catch 
markets by surprise and shake confidence and trust.

The intensity of any stress that could emerge will naturally depend on the 
condition of financial institutions. Banks are now much better capitalised than before 
the Great Financial Crisis, notably thanks to stronger prudential regulation. Their 
profits have also benefited from higher interest rates, which have buoyed net interest

margins. That said, many are still facing longer-term profitability challenges and 
investor mistrust, as reflected in depressed price-to-book ratios. The more lightly 
regulated parts of the non-bank financial sector remain a source of concern as stress 
amplifiers, owing to hidden leverage and liquidity mismatches.

Two real economy pressure points stand out: fragile fiscal positions and subdued 
productivity growth.

As assessed in detail in last year’s AER, fiscal trajectories represent one of the 
biggest threats to macroeconomic and financial stability in the medium to longer 
term. Pre-pandemic, the threat was masked by the long phase of exceptionally low 
interest rates, which had taken the debt service burden to historical lows despite 
historically high debt-to-GDP ratios. Since then, further broad-based fiscal support 
has darkened the picture. In some cases, fiscal policy is still adding stimulus to the 
economy, acting at cross-purposes with monetary policy. Absent consolidation 
measures, debt ratios are set to climb over time, even in a scenario in which interest 
rates remain below the growth rate of the economy. And demands on fiscal 
authorities have been increasing, as the financing needs of the green transition and 
geopolitical considerations have come on top of the looming burden of ageing 
populations.

Post-pandemic, productivity growth – the key to longer-term prosperity – has 
been generally lacklustre compared with previous trends, although the United States 
is one exception. The lingering impact of the pandemic makes it especially hard to 
parse the influence of cyclical and structural forces. But gradually slowing productivity 
growth was a concern even before Covid-19 struck. The wave of technological 
advances under way, notably AI, could significantly improve the picture. Still, it would 
be unwise to simply assume it will. Should slow productivity growth continue, it would 
make the economic and political environment more challenging. It would add to 
inflationary pressures, reduce the headroom for both monetary and fiscal policy, 
and, more generally, widen the gap between society’s expectations and policymakers’ 
capacity to meet them, making any adjustments much harder.

The overarching policy challenge is to complete the job of returning to price stability 
while at the same time keeping a firm eye on the longer term, thereby laying the 
foundations for sustainable and balanced growth. This has implications for both policy 
settings and frameworks in the monetary, prudential, fiscal and structural domains.

The priority for monetary policy is to firmly re-establish price stability. In doing so, 
the lessons learned from the conduct of policy in the tumultuous years since the turn 
of the century can be helpful in guiding decisions (see below). This means travelling 
the last mile of the disinflation with a steady hand, being especially alert to the risk 
of further significant upward surprises and not hesitating to tighten again if inflation 
proves to be more stubborn and unresponsive than anticipated. It also means 
safeguarding the room for policy manoeuvre that central banks have finally 
regained – the only silver lining of the inflation flare-up. For instance, it would be 
imprudent to cut interest rates significantly based on the view that the “neutral” or 
“natural” interest rate (r-star) remains as low as it was perceived to be before inflation 
took hold. We simply know too little about where such a rate might be and what its 
determinants are. Rather, it would be safer to be guided by actual inflation and to 
take this opportunity to wean the economy off the low-for-long state that can 
generate longer-term risks for financial, macroeconomic and, hence, price stability.

The prospects of greater divergence in the outlook for interest rates and 
concomitant pressures on exchange rates and capital flows could raise additional 
challenges for adjustments in monetary policy settings. Emerging market economies, 
in particular, are in a better position to address them than in the past, thanks to the 
build-up of foreign currency reserve buffers and stronger policy frameworks 
generally. As experience in recent years indicates, this should provide greater room 
for manoeuvre in the calibration of monetary policy, supported, where appropriate, 
by judicious use of foreign exchange (FX) intervention.

The priority for prudential policy is to strengthen further the resilience of the 
financial system. There is still a window of opportunity to build up defences for the 
credit losses that will inevitably materialise at some point. In particular, on the 
macroprudential side, it would be important to avoid a premature loosening, calibrating 
the measures with respect to financial cycle conditions. On the microprudential side, 
tight supervision can temper risk-taking and help ensure adequate provisioning and 
realistic asset valuations. Should financial stress emerge, supervisors would need to 
act in concert with monetary and fiscal authorities to manage the strains in an 
orderly way while allowing monetary policy to focus on re-establishing price stability.

The priority for fiscal policy is to consolidate with clear-eyed and firm resolve. 
This would relieve pressure on inflation, even if in the near term any removal of 
lingering energy and food subsidies would raise prices – a foreseen side effect. More 
importantly, it would pave the way for the arduous long-term task of ensuring the 
sustainability of public finances.

Monetary policy frameworks have faced a series of extraordinary tests since the 
Great Financial Crisis shattered the deceptive tranquillity of the so-called Great 
Moderation. And central banks have delivered: they have contained the damage of 
financial crises; they avoided major shortfalls of inflation from target all the way to 
the pandemic; and they have put in place a solid basis for a return to price stability 
following the post-pandemic inflation surge. The years ahead may be no less 
challenging. Unless fiscal positions are brought under control, the threats to financial 
and macroeconomic stability will grow. The risk of global fragmentation, the reality 
of climate change and demographic trends could make the supply of goods and 
services less elastic and the world more inflation-prone. At the same time, a return of 
persistent disinflationary pressures cannot be ruled out either, especially if the 
current wave of technological advances bears fruit.

Against this backdrop, Chapter II’s in-depth analysis of the conduct of monetary 
policy over this long historical phase points to a number of lessons that could inform 
refinements to existing frameworks. Some of these lessons confirm previous widely 
held beliefs; others temper previous expectations. Together, they help us to better 
understand monetary policy’s strengths and limitations. Five lessons stand out.

First, forceful monetary tightening can prevent inflation from transitioning to a 
high-inflation regime. Arguably, central banks underestimated the extent to which 
the exceptional and prolonged further easing at the time of the pandemic would 
contribute to the flare-up in inflation, and could have responded more promptly once 
inflation surged. But their subsequent vigorous and determined response has so far 
succeeded in preventing a shift to a high-inflation regime.

Second, forceful action can stabilise the financial system at times of stress and 
prevent the economy from falling into a tailspin, thereby eliminating a major source 
of deflationary pressures. On such occasions, the deployment of the central bank 
balance sheet does the heavy lifting, as the central bank is called upon to perform as 
lender and, increasingly, market-maker of last resort. That said, whenever the solvency

of borrowers, financial or non-financial, is threatened, this requires government 
backstops. And those interventions, if repeated, can distort risk-taking incentives in 
the longer term. Hence the importance of strengthening regulation and supervision 
further.

Third, exceptionally strong and prolonged monetary easing has limitations. It 
exhibits diminishing returns, it cannot by itself fine-tune inflation in a low-inflation 
regime, and it can generate unwelcome side effects over the long term. These 
include weakening financial intermediation and inducing resource misallocations, 
encouraging excessive risk-taking and the build-up of vulnerabilities, and raising 
economic and political economy challenges for central banks as their balance sheets 
balloon. These limitations were not fully appreciated at the time the measures were 
first introduced.

Fourth, communication has become more complicated. The multiplicity of 
instruments makes it difficult to aggregate their effect and to understand which of 
them are intended to influence the stance, and when. The failure to anticipate the 
surge in inflation has threatened credibility. More generally, there is a growing 
“expectations gap” between what central banks are expected to deliver and what 
they can actually deliver.

Finally, the experience of emerging market economies, in particular, has 
illustrated how the deployment of complementary tools can help to improve the 
near-term trade-offs that monetary policy faces between price and financial stability. 
If used judiciously, FX intervention – a form of balance sheet policy, but in foreign 
currency – allows the build-up of FX buffers that strengthens resilience and can help 
to address disruptive swings in global financial conditions and exchange rates. 
Macroprudential measures, which central banks either control or help set, have been 
a welcome addition to the toolkit to address financial booms and busts.

These lessons highlight the importance of four features that could inform 
refinements to frameworks: robustness, realism in ambition, safety margins and 
nimbleness. Together, they can reduce the risk that monetary policy, just as fiscal 
policy, is relied upon excessively to drive growth – the “growth illusion” analysed in 
detail in last year’s AER. And they are designed to ensure that monetary policy 
focuses on maintaining inflation within the region of price stability while safeguarding 
financial stability. Consider the implications of these considerations for the definition 
of the inflation objective, for acceptable deviations from targets, for the deployment 
of the tools, and for the institutional arrangements that support policy, including the 
role of communication in that context.

The operational definition of price stability would need to help hardwire a 
low-inflation regime while allowing for deviations consistent with central banks’ ability 
to control inflation. Ideally, the objective would be low enough so that inflation 
would not materially influence economic agents’ behaviour. Adjusting current targets 
upwards, quite apart from the risk of undermining central banks’ hard-earned 
credibility, would not be consistent with this goal and would risk squandering the 
self-equilibrating properties that inflation exhibits in such a low-inflation regime.

When inflation evolves in a low-inflation regime, there is room for greater 
tolerance than in the past for moderate, even if persistent, shortfalls of inflation 
from narrowly defined targets. The additional room would take advantage of the 
self-equilibrating properties of inflation and reduce the side effects of keeping 
interest rates very low for extended periods. This would allow central banks to better 
take into account the threats to financial, macroeconomic and price stability that 
develop over longer horizons and would reduce the risk of losing precious safety 
margins. At the same time, the self-reinforcing nature of transitions from low- to 
high-inflation regimes underscores the importance of reacting strongly when inflation 
rises sharply above levels consistent with price stability and threatens to become

entrenched. It is one thing to avoid fine-tuning, leveraging the self-stabilising properties 
of the low-inflation regime; it is quite another to put the system’s self-equilibrating 
properties to the test.

The desirability of operating with safety margins to reduce the vulnerability of 
the economy puts a premium on the prudent deployment of instruments. This means 
implementing policies that include as an explicit consideration retaining policy room 
for manoeuvre over successive business and financial cycles. It means putting a 
premium on exit strategies from extreme policy settings designed to stabilise the 
economy and on keeping balance sheets as small and riskless as possible, subject to 
effectively fulfilling mandates. And it means avoiding overreliance on approaches 
that may unduly hinder flexibility, such as certain forms of forward guidance, critical 
dependencies on unobservable and highly model-specific concepts, or frameworks 
designed for seemingly invariant economic environments.

Good monetary policy often requires taking actions that may involve costs in 
the short run to reap benefits in the longer run. This calls for appropriate supporting 
communication strategies and institutional arrangements. As regards communication, 
the toughest and growing challenge is to narrow the “expectations gap” – a major 
source of pressure on the central bank to test the limits of sustainable economic 
expansions and to pursue mutually inconsistent and overly ambitious objectives. 
Failing to do so can ultimately undermine the central bank’s legitimacy and society’s 
trust. As regards institutional arrangements, there is a need to shield the central bank 
from political economy pressures, be they linked to inflation or the build-up of 
financial imbalances. Safeguards for central bank independence are essential. They 
may become even more important in the years ahead.

Monetary policy frameworks, however, are only one element of the broader policy 
setup. Indeed, the trade-offs monetary policy faces can become unmanageable, and 
sustainable macroeconomic and financial stability remain beyond reach, unless other 
policies also play a key role in a coherent whole – what the BIS has termed a holistic 
macro-financial stability framework.

In the years ahead, further efforts will be needed to strengthen prudential 
frameworks. In the near term, it is essential to complete the international banking 
reforms, known as Basel III, in a full, timely and consistent manner. In the longer 
term, as discussed in more detail in last year’s AER, it will be important to adjust 
regulatory and supervisory arrangements in the light of the evolving financial 
landscape and the lessons drawn from episodes of financial stress, both recent ones 
and inevitable future ones. An area that requires urgent action is the non-bank 
financial intermediation sector. Despite many post-Great Financial Crisis initiatives, a 
systemic stability-oriented (“macroprudential”) regulatory framework has proved 
beyond reach. Making substantial progress may well require more incisive steps, not 
least to include financial stability as an explicit objective in the mandate of securities 
regulators.

Fiscal policy frameworks, too, require strengthening. It is imperative that 
sufficient institutional safeguards be put in place to ensure that fiscal positions are 
sustainable and that, just like monetary policy, fiscal policy can operate with adequate 
safety margins. The types of remedy are well known. They all involve constraints that 
can be embedded in legislation and enforced in a variety of ways, with different 
degrees of stringency. Ultimately, though, no remedy is workable without the political 
will to adopt it. And implementing the necessary policy adjustments has arguably 
become harder since the Great Financial Crisis, as expectations of government support 
have grown.

The same political will is needed to revive the flagging effort to reinvigorate the 
supply potential of the global economy. Only structural policies can deliver the 
productivity improvements needed to enable higher sustainable growth. Recognising

this point, in turn, calls for a broad change of mindset to dispel the deeply rooted 
“growth illusion” at the heart of the debt-fuelled growth model that the world has de 
facto relied on for too long. The analysis and proposals in this report are intended to 
promote such a change.

AI impinges on the job of central banks in two important ways. 
First, it bears on central banks’ core activities as stewards of the economy. The 
versatility of AI models will have far-reaching implications for the economy. In the 
labour market, AI could displace some workers but could complement the skills of 
others and introduce altogether new tasks that boost economic activity, innovation 
and growth. Central banks’ mandates around monetary and financial stability would 
be profoundly affected by AI. The impact on inflation will depend on how the balance 
of supply and demand effects plays out, but widespread adoption of AI could 
enhance firms’ ability to adjust prices quickly in response to changing circumstances, 
affecting inflation dynamics. Financial markets will also be affected, with implications 
for market dynamics and financial fragility. These issues are rightly of great concern 
to central banks.

AI also affects central banks as users of the technology. The ability to impose 
mathematical structure on unstructured data makes AI ideally suited to identify 
patterns that are otherwise obscured. This ability “to find a needle in the haystack” 
could offer breakthroughs in nowcasting economic activity and in the monitoring of 
financial systems for the build-up of risks. The “zero-shot” or “few-shot” nature of 
LLMs also means that they can perform tasks other than simply analysing textual 
information. LLMs excel at detecting patterns. Just as LLMs are trained by guessing 
the next word in a sentence using a vast database of textual information, 
macroeconomic forecasting models can use the same techniques to forecast the next 
numerical observation from a sea of structured and unstructured data. Many central 
banks already support their economic analysis with nowcasting models, producing 
real-time assessments of the economy. Financial market applications by central banks 
mirror AI tools already in use by private sector institutions in their data analytics, risk 
management and fraud detection, but AI’s potential impact could be of even greater 
importance for central banks given their influence on the economy.

All this said, AI also introduces new challenges.
One such challenge is new sources of cyber risk that exploit weaknesses in LLMs to 
make the model behave in unintended ways, or to reveal sensitive information. By the

same token, however, AI can be harnessed to strengthen cyber security by uncovering 
anomalies, trends or correlations that might not be obvious to the naked eye.

Most importantly, the new era of AI highlights the importance of data governance. 
While the underlying mathematics of the latest AI models follow basic principles that 
would be familiar to earlier generations of computer scientists, their capabilities derive 
from the combination of vast troves of data and massive computing power that is up 
to the task of unlocking the insights. The centrality of data demands a rethink of 
central banks’ traditional roles as the compilers, users and disseminators of data.

Our conventional approach to data favours using existing structured data sets 
organised around traditional statistical classifications. However, the age of AI will rely 
increasingly on unstructured data drawn from all walks of life, collected by autonomous 
AI agents. Data availability and data governance are key enabling factors for central 
banks’ use of AI. Both will require investment in technology and in human capital. 
Above all, the challenges of the age of AI necessitate close cooperation among 
central banks. Central banks need to come together to foster a “community practice” 
to share knowledge, data, best practices and AI tools.

I. Laying a robust macro-financial foundation 
for the future

• 
Following the most synchronised and intense monetary policy tightening in a generation, inflation 
has declined substantially with little collateral damage so far. The financial system has been largely 
strain-free since March 2023, and market pricing suggests a smooth landing.

• 
That said, a number of pressure points could throw the global economy off track. Inflationary 
pressures may prove more stubborn than anticipated, growth may stall and long-standing fiscal and 
macro-financial vulnerabilities may lead to stress.

• 
Monetary policy will need to finish the job on disinflation. Fiscal policy will need to consolidate. 
Prudential policy will need to remain vigilant and continue efforts to enhance resilience. Structural policy 
will need to set the basis for sustainable growth and prepare the economy for the challenges ahead.

The global economy appears to be poised for a smooth landing. The sudden 
post-pandemic burst of inflation was met with the most synchronised and intense 
monetary policy tightening in a generation. So far, the efforts have borne fruit, 
defying last year’s concerns of looming recessions and very sticky inflation. The 
financial system has proved resilient. The baseline going forward is a gradual 
convergence of growth rates to their medium-term trends as inflation approaches 
central bank targets.

Still, old risks have not gone away while new ones have come into sight. A 
number of pressure points could compromise the benign baseline scenario. 
Inflationary dynamics could re-emerge, spurred by ongoing adjustments of relative 
prices. Geopolitical events and commodity price increases could complicate the last 
mile of disinflation. Varying exposure to inflationary pressures could deepen the 
divergences across jurisdictions, bringing about disorderly adjustment in exchange 
rates and capital flows. Fiscal policies could boost demand at an inopportune time, 
while debt sustainability concerns could strain the financial system. Depleted buffers 
and the cumulative effects of past monetary policy tightening could reach tipping 
points and prompt a sharp squeeze in private demand. Seemingly dormant, 
macro-financial imbalances could unwind in a costly way.

In this challenging landscape, policies will need to finish the job of guiding the 
economy back to price stability and set the foundation for durable growth. In doing 
so, macroeconomic policies will need to keep a firm eye on the longer-term 
consequences of near-term decisions. Monetary policy will need to stay alert to a 
re-emergence of inflationary pressures and preserve the regained room for manoeuvre. 
Fiscal consolidation remains essential to support disinflation and restore debt 
sustainability. Prudential policy needs to remain vigilant and continue the efforts to 
strengthen the resilience of the financial system. Structural reform efforts, which 
have flagged for too long, need to be revived to support higher sustainable growth 
and a better income distribution. Enhancing growth and resilience through reforms 
that foster competition, flexibility and innovation will improve economic well-being 
and ensure the capacity for effective macro-stabilisation policy responses, when the 
need arises.

This chapter reviews economic and financial conditions over the past year. It then 
discusses the key pressure points and lays out scenarios for how they might threaten 
a smooth landing. Finally, it elaborates on the near- and long-term policy challenges.

The global economy proved resilient over the past year. Growth surprised to the 
upside across several major advanced economies (AEs), including the United States 
and Japan, as well as large emerging market economies (EMEs), such as India, Mexico 
and Brazil (Graph 1). At 3.2% for 2023, global growth exceeded expectations as of 
mid-2023, slowing only moderately from 3.5% in 2022. Fears of a global recession 
proved unfounded. Growth this year is expected to hold up at 3.0%. To date, the 
smooth-landing trajectory appears intact.

Two factors help explain this surprising resilience. 
First, the labour market remained unusually buoyant in relation to output. 
Unemployment rates stayed close to pre-pandemic levels, edging up only slowly 
despite sharp monetary policy tightening. Based on historical relationships, the 
labour market was generally stronger than would have been predicted by output 
growth (Graph 2.A). Labour market tightness reflected the continued cyclical uplift 
from the services-led recovery, which is more labour intensive, and pandemic-related 
behavioural shifts.1 This, in turn, lent support to household income (purple bars in 
Graph 2.B) and domestic demand, contributing to more resilient activity.

Second, the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy proved smooth 
and non-disruptive. One reason was the measured pass-through of monetary policy to 
financial conditions. Buoyant market sentiment kept risk spreads compressed and the 
financial system remained largely strain-free (see below). Importantly, the pass-through

from tighter financial conditions to real activity was dampened by robust household 
and corporate balance sheets. While private debt levels are high, the prominence of 
fixed-rate loans and the lengthening of loan maturities delayed the impact of higher 
rates on borrowers (Graph 2.C). More generally, large cash cushions allowed investment 
to remain robust, while excess savings from the Covid-19 era and the lingering effects 
of fiscal support, including energy subsidies (yellow bars in Graph 2.B), played a part 
in sheltering consumption.

EMEs were resilient, contrary to some earlier tightening cycles, reaping the 
benefits of stronger policy frameworks and domestic financial systems. Since the 
early 2000s, the shift towards inflation targeting and greater exchange rate flexibility, 
supported by larger reserves, had enhanced central bank credibility, helping to 
anchor inflation expectations and to reduce the pass-through of changes in the 
exchange rate to inflation (Chapter II). Stronger prudential regulation and supervision 
had strengthened the banking system’s resilience. Fiscal policy frameworks had also 
improved somewhat, and many EMEs benefited from a greater market tolerance for 
government indebtedness, hence the broad stability of sovereign credit ratings despite 
much higher debt levels for many countries. A substantial reduction in currency 
mismatch in borrowers’ balance sheets and the development of domestic-currency 
bond markets reduced the sensitivity of EME bond spreads to global financial 
conditions.2

Not all jurisdictions around the world proved equally resilient, however, and 
differences in growth became more apparent as the year progressed. Growth was 
remarkably strong in the United States, supported by substantial fiscal spending. Latin 
American economies, most notably Brazil and Mexico, performed well, also benefiting 
from proximity to the United States. By contrast, the euro area, the United Kingdom 
and several small open AEs registered barely positive growth. Economic activity was 
also typically weaker in central Europe and emerging Asia. Subdued global trade amid 
a continued manufacturing slump played a role, given some of these economies’

reliance on exports. The greater impact of rising energy prices, especially in Europe, 
and smaller fiscal support also played a part. In China, domestic real estate woes 
continued to beset the economy and weigh on consumer confidence, prompting 
further policy support for the sector. Activity was held up by strong investment in 
manufacturing and infrastructure as well as by exports.

Sustained disinflation opened the door to a monetary policy pivot

The decline in inflation was common for both core and headline, but headline 
decreased more, especially in AEs. Headline inflation dropped below 3% in AEs and 
below 4% in EMEs (Graph 4.A). This was in large part due to commodity prices 
retreating from 2022 peaks, despite elevated geopolitical tensions (red line in 
Graph 4.B). By early 2024, contributions to inflation from food and energy had largely 
disappeared in AEs and had dropped significantly in EMEs (yellow bars in Graph 4.A).

Among core inflation components, moderation in price growth was more 
pronounced in (core) goods than in services. Benign supply chain conditions (blue 
line in Graph 4.B) and a continued rotation of spending from goods back to services 
(Graph  4.C) supported these patterns. The main inflation driver in AEs became 
services price growth, a more persistent component historically. Similarly, in EMEs, 
contributions to inflation from services doubled since 2021 and remained large, 
while contributions from food, energy and other goods shrank.

Declining prices in China have been delivering a disinflationary impulse to prices elsewhere. Through falling 
prices for its exports, as well as the impact of weaker domestic demand on commodity prices, developments 
in China are estimated to have reduced the annual rate of import price increases in other major economies by 
around 5 percentage points over 2023, on average. It can take time for such downward pressures to be fully 
reflected in consumer prices given that many of China’s exports are intermediate goods (such as steel) or 
capital goods (such as machinery).1 While these direct effects are the focus of this box, indirect effects are also 
likely to be arising from China’s role as the marginal producer of many products, which would lead competitors 
from other countries to also reduce prices.

The depreciation of the Chinese yuan against many other currencies further boosted China’s competitiveness, 
amplifying the impact of China’s domestic disinflation on export volumes. Between early 2022 and early 2024, 
the nominal effective exchange rate fell by about 6% (Graph A2.A, red line). The combination of falling prices and 
a depreciating currency caused the yuan’s real value to depreciate by 13% over the same period (Graph A2.A, 
blue line).

Declining prices in China have increasingly translated into lower import prices in other countries. Estimates 
based on four-quarter changes in export prices within the network of bilateral product-level trading 
relationships among 12 major countries indicate that, during 2022, China’s exports added around 2 percentage 
points to the increase in import prices in its trading partners.2 In contrast, by the third quarter of 2023 their 
median estimated effect was a 5.8 percentage point reduction, which moderated to 4.1 percentage points the 
following quarter (Graph A2.B). Looking at individual countries, the effect was stronger where Chinese exports 
made up a larger share, such as in Australia, Brazil and India.

While the effects on CPI are likely to build over time, elasticity estimates from other studies suggest that a 
5.8 percentage point decrease in import prices would eventually translate into a 1.5 percentage point lower 
CPI inflation rate, on average, albeit with significant variation across countries.3

Both supply and demand factors played a role in the disinflation process. 
Distinguishing their respective contributions is difficult, but results from a range of 
stylised exercises can help shed some light.

One exercise, which distinguishes supply and demand based on the relationship 
between price and quantity changes, points to cross-country differences.3 This 
analysis suggests that more than half of the decline in inflation from its peak reflects 
increased supply in the United Kingdom, the United States, South Africa, Indonesia 
and Korea (Graph 5.A). By contrast, weaker demand appears to have accounted for 
more of the inflation decline in Canada, France and Mexico.

A complementary simple regression exercise provides further insights by 
breaking down US inflation into the contribution of a wider range of factors 
(Graph 5.B). According to these estimates, the resolution of supply chain pressures 
explains a significant portion of the inflation decline since late 2022 (blue bars), 
confirming the importance of supply factors. Monetary policy has also played a key 
role (see Box B for further discussion). One important channel is by anchoring 
inflation expectations, following their upward drift during the inflation flare-up (red 
bars). Expectations of low and stable future inflation influence current spending as

well as the price- and wage-setting decisions of firms and households; anchored 
expectations therefore limit second-round effects and in turn contribute to the 
actual decline in inflation in future. Another channel is by restraining demand. 
Indeed, sectors that are more sensitive to the output gap, such as transportation and 
food, experienced larger drops in price growth (Graph 5.C). Not captured in these 
estimates, the globally synchronised tightening has also had an impact by cooling 
commodity price increases.4

Changes in policy rates in Asia were more moderate and varied, partly reflecting 
lower inflation in the region and greater use of other stabilisation instruments, such 
as foreign exchange intervention. The People’s Bank of China eased monetary policy 
further in response to weak domestic conditions. The Bank of Japan increased the 
policy rate for the first time since 2007 in response to accumulated evidence that 
inflation could finally rise to the 2% target on a durable basis. Bank Indonesia raised 
rates, while several Asian EMEs intervened in foreign exchange markets to mitigate 
pressure on their currencies linked to interest rate differentials with AEs.

Against this benign macroeconomic backdrop, exuberant financial markets anticipated 
a smooth landing, in part helped by a lack of major incidents like those in March 2023.

The prospects of lower policy rates and resilient growth, alongside improving 
earnings, propelled equity markets across most AEs and EMEs (Graphs 6.A and 6.B). 
The rally was particularly strong in technology stocks, which benefited from optimism 
related to artificial intelligence (AI). Valuation ratios of AI stocks reached lofty heights, 
above historical norms (Graph 6.C). China was a notable exception to this general 
picture, as stocks there slumped at the beginning of 2024 before partly recovering.

Credit markets also reflected the general risk-on sentiment. Credit spreads of 
investment grade and high-yield bonds continued their downward trajectory from 
mid-2022. They started the review period above historical norms but finished it 
deeply below (Graph 7.A). Despite such narrow spreads, corporate bond issuance 
remained subdued in both the euro area and the United States.

The optimism in financial markets contrasted with more cautious central bank 
communication. While taking cues from incoming data and policy announcements, 
market participants anticipated more monetary easing ahead than central banks did 
for much of the period, especially in the United States. Accordingly, they paid less 
attention to inflation surprises than the Federal Reserve (Graph 7.B). Still, the 
perception gap narrowed over time (Graph 7.C), and markets converged to central 
bank assessments by the second quarter of 2024 amid renewed inflation concerns.

On balance, global financial conditions tightened during the review period, 
despite the risk-on mood. They tightened sharply in the third quarter of 2023 and 
loosened through end-2023, finishing the review period tighter than where they 
started and tighter than historical averages (Graph 8.A). Conditions danced to the tune 
of evolving perceptions of the degree of monetary easing ahead. Uncertainty about 
the future path of interest rates was high, to the point that bond volatility hovered 
well above equity volatility – a rare occurrence. The gap between the two volatilities

was positive for most of 2023 and 2024 – and the widest in 20 years – unlike in 
previous years (Graph 8.B). In contrast to past risk-on episodes, the dollar appreciated 
(Graph 8.C). Notably, the Japanese yen dropped to record lows against the dollar, on 
account of interest rate differentials.

In contrast to the exuberance in financial markets, bank lending remained 
cautious. Banks reported tighter lending standards (Graph 9.A) and weaker demand

Inflation has declined considerably following the strongest surge seen in decades. The effects of the robust 
post-pandemic rebound in aggregate demand, further boosted by fiscal and monetary policies, have faded, 
while those of the rotation in demand are still under way. Supply chain disruptions and war-induced commodity 
price shocks have ebbed. But monetary policy has also played an important role. This box examines the 
impact of monetary policy through the initial burst and subsequent decline of inflation.

At the onset of the inflation spike, the stance of monetary policy was extraordinarily accommodative. Indeed, 
in response to the pandemic, central banks globally cut policy interest rates to historical lows, and some stepped 
up asset purchases. This came on top of the unusually long period of extraordinarily easy policy that had followed 
the Great Financial Crisis, given the persistent shortfall of inflation from point targets. While inflation flared up 
in early 2021, major central banks began to lift rates only one year later, partly due to uncertainty about its 
persistence after the long period of very subdued price increases (Graph B1.A). With the benefit of hindsight, 
the exceptional degree of accommodation put in place to support the economy probably contributed to the 
surprisingly strong rebound in economic activity, increasing the risk of second-round price adjustments.

As the full extent of inflationary pressures became apparent, monetary policy responded forcefully to rein 
in inflation. Central banks raised policy rates to two-decade highs, keeping them there even as inflation began 
to come off the peak. Central banks also clearly signalled their willingness and determination to act as needed 
to return inflation to target. These decisive policy actions illustrated central banks’ commitment to price 
stability and helped to restrain demand, a key force that had pushed inflation higher.

To quantify the role of monetary policy, one approach is to appeal to historical relationships and ask what 
has been different this time. Focusing on the United States, the exercise uses a time series model to capture the 
joint evolution of inflation, monetary policy and other key macroeconomic variables, and identifies the effects 
of monetary policy as those consistent with theory. The exercise then compares the actual outcomes with one 
where monetary policy would have reacted more promptly to the inflation burst, in line with the past reaction 
function. The comparison suggests that the initial slow response of monetary policy to inflation did contribute 
to price pressures. Had monetary policy kept pace with macroeconomic developments, in line with past

patterns, and tightened earlier, core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation would have been 
around 1 percentage point lower than the actual peak of 5.6% in early 2022 (Graph B1.B). The analysis also 
indicates that this effect was temporary, as the subsequent swift policy tightening brought the monetary 
stance in line with past behaviour. Higher interest rates associated with this catch-up in turn contributed 
importantly to the disinflation observed since mid-2023.

The preceding analysis, subject to the usual caveats of any statistical model, does not directly capture a 
key role played by monetary policy: anchoring economic agents’ expectations to a low-inflation regime. In a 
low-inflation environment, such anchoring is relatively trivial because households and businesses pay little 
attention to inflation. But as inflation rises, it can quickly draw public focus. A strong monetary policy response 
becomes crucial in pre-empting a transition to a high-inflation regime. Without it, the central bank’s commitment 
to price stability could be called into question, resulting in a much higher and more persistent inflation surge 
(see Chapter II).

Indicators of inflation expectations confirm this role. Central banks’ forceful policy tightening appears to 
have kept them in check. Although medium-term inflation expectations ticked up in some cases early on, they 
eventually settled within the pre-pandemic range (Graph B1.C).

The financial system remained resilient despite the challenges posed by the 
higher interest rate environment. Some signs of strain did emerge. US regional banks 
were in the spotlight again, following losses in New York Community Bancorp. And 
Chinese banks remained under pressure as the problems in the real estate sector 
continued. That said, the strains were localised and were nothing like those seen in 
March 2023 among regional banks in the United States or in Europe, where a global 
systemically important bank, Credit Suisse, had gone under. And any incipient stress 
was absorbed in an orderly manner. Bank valuations recovered (Graph 10.A), and

Banks remained resilient and EMEs weathered the tightening cycle well1 
Graph 10

capital ratios remained stable or improved. Despite one of the most synchronised and 
fastest tightening cycles in AEs, financial markets in EMEs managed to weather the 
change very smoothly compared with past episodes (Graph 10.B).

A smooth landing is the central scenario, but several pressure points remain. Four 
stand out: the underlying inflation trajectory, the macro-financial backdrop, fiscal 
positions and productivity growth. These pressure points, and their interactions, 
could compromise the expected benign outcome.

Despite encouraging progress to date, two key and closely related relative price 
adjustments could stretch out the path towards inflation targets.

The first relative price adjustment is that of core goods versus services. The 
powerful pandemic-induced sectoral shifts in demand interrupted the decades-long 
entrenched trend of services prices outpacing core goods prices (Graph 11.A).5 The 
initial plunge in the relative price of services vis-à-vis core goods has partly unwound 
following the resolution of supply disruptions and the fall in commodity prices. Indeed, 
most of the recent disinflation has been driven by goods prices; services inflation has 
proven more stubborn, and its contribution to overall inflation has increased.

Despite the recent unwinding, the relative price of services vis-à-vis goods 
remains below the pre-pandemic trend in most economies, and a further adjustment 
is likely. The price of services vis-à-vis core goods in EMEs is still well below its 2019

pre-pandemic ratio, while it has just recently crossed it in AEs. In both cases, the 
relative price remains below the previous trend. Unless the pandemic-induced 
disruptions have permanently altered preferences or productivity patterns, the 
upward trend in the relative price would re-establish itself. If lower core goods price 
growth does not compensate for the shortfall, the upward pressure on inflation 
could be sizeable (see scenario 1 below).

There are signs that are consistent with this risk. Demand for services has 
been growing more strongly than that for goods in many economies – an indication 
that consumers are reverting to pre-pandemic preferences. Input – most notably 
labour – cost pressures also remain more pronounced for services. Admittedly, core 
goods price growth could slow further, including owing to developments in China 
(Box A). That said, goods price increases could gather pace at some point, given the 
indications of greater fragmentation in the global economy.

The second relative price adjustment is that of labour versus consumer goods 
and services, ie real wages. As inflation surged, real wages plummeted across most 
jurisdictions, and have yet to recover despite robust labour markets (Graph 11.B). 
The catch-up may take time and be less than complete if workers’ bargaining power 
remains as limited as it was before the pandemic.6 Even so, there is a risk that 
sustained robust conditions in labour markets lead to persistent wage demands in 
excess of growth in productivity. And since terms of trade effects have largely 
dissipated, there is no obvious reason why real wages should not catch up. These 
pressures could remain in the pipeline even after inflation subsides, especially in 
jurisdictions where wage bargaining is more centralised and staggered. If the 
purchasing power lost in the recent inflation burst were recouped in the coming 
years, there could be significant upward pressure on inflation (see scenario 1 below).

The risks are related because services are more labour-intensive than goods. 
This is one reason why price growth in the services sector generally tends to be more 
persistent. It also helps to explain why the pass-through from wages to prices tends 
to be higher in that sector. For example, estimates based on the euro area suggest 
that the pass-through is twice as large in the private services sector than in industrial 
sectors. Moreover, the lags are significant, about two to three years (Graph 11.C).7

In addition to the incomplete adjustment of relative prices, other pressure points 
are noteworthy.

Rather mechanically, the withdrawal or expiration of support measures could 
unleash new short-term price increases. In particular, fuel subsidies are still substantially 
above pre-pandemic levels, highlighting the significant role of fiscal policy in containing 
living costs. Lifting the subsidies is essential, both from a fiscal sustainability point of 
view and to avoid medium-term inflationary pressures. But, as was clear from the 
outset, dismantling them will have short-term costs in terms of inflation and make 
the disinflation journey bumpier.

In addition, further disruptive supply side shocks cannot be ruled out, particularly 
in the current geopolitical environment. Tensions could flare up and have a significant 
impact on commodity prices in particular. After a long period of inflation well above 
target, further shocks would be more likely to threaten a shift to a high-inflation 
regime, as behaviour adjusts to the recent more inflationary experience.

Although the financial system has been resilient so far, macro-financial imbalances 
could unwind and cause headwinds due to historically high levels of debt and debt 
service costs. As the impact of pandemic-era loan assistance programmes fades, 
some households and businesses might find themselves in a precarious position. The 
cumulative effects of policy tightening could then carry momentum.

Indeed, particularly in AEs, there are signs that the financial cycle has peaked, as 
credit indicators and real property prices start returning to their longer-term trends 
(Graph 12.A). Typically, this is a harbinger of credit losses ahead and weaker economic 
activity.8 Historically, financial stress tends to show up within two to three years following 
the first rate hike, as loan impairment ratios rise and economic activity weakens 
(Graph 12.B, yellow and blue lines, respectively).9 The current cycle is still in very early 
stages of the post-peak phase (red and purple lines). This historical comparison 
suggests that it is typical for stress to emerge only with a lag. The risk is higher the 
longer interest rates stay up, putting pressure on borrowers that need to refinance their 
debts, especially once the pandemic support that kept defaults artificially low fades.

Within this broad picture, several pressure points merit particular attention. 
First, deteriorating balance sheets in the non-financial sector and dwindling 
savings buffers could cause domestic demand to falter. Even for those households 
benefiting from large fiscal support, excess savings have run out or diminished 
substantially (Graph 13.A).10 As maturity walls are hit (Graphs 13.B and 13.C), the 
need to roll over debt at higher interest rates could further dent the financial buffers 
of households and firms. The cumulative effects of past monetary tightening could 
generate a materially stronger contractionary effect on domestic demand than seen 
in the last few years.

Second, and more specifically, commercial real estate (CRE) is facing both cyclical 
and structural headwinds (Box C). CRE bankruptcies could impact banks’ lending 
capacity and overall financial health. Signs of possible future stress in the sector 
appeared initially in 2023, with losses on US CRE exposures crystallising in the books 
of a few US regional banks and banks elsewhere. Major banks have also reportedly 
started increasing provisions in anticipation of future losses. So far, the banking 
system has proved resilient, but vulnerabilities could become evident if exposures to 
CRE are underreported and if prices drop more than expected.

The macro-financial impact of a large CRE correction could be significant. In the 
1990s, when CRE prices fell by over 40% in real terms, credit and GDP growth dropped 
by 12 and 4 percentage points, respectively (Graph 14.A). An econometric estimate of 
macro-financial responses to CRE price shocks suggests a sharp fall in CRE prices this 
time could have a similarly material impact on credit and GDP growth (Graph 14.B). 
While naturally uncertain, these estimates highlight the possible repercussions of a 
CRE bust. And the impact could be amplified by credit losses or a broader drop in 
other asset prices. Indeed, the risk of such a drop looms large for the residential 
segment of real estate markets, where house price valuations continue to be very 
stretched relative to in the past (Graph 14.C).

Third, nonbank financial intermediation merits close monitoring. In particular, 
private credit and equity markets have grown exponentially in the post-Great 
Financial Crisis (GFC) years of cheap financing (Box D).11 This has increased their 
vulnerability to higher interest rates. Despite the recent drop in credit spreads, the 
gap between those in the riskiest and those in other loan segments has increased 
(Graph 15.A), highlighting pockets of vulnerability. Opaque valuations and infrequent 
updates of these valuations might create a lagged reaction of private markets to a 
potential correction in public markets. A correction in private equity and credit could 
spark broader financial stress via at least three channels. First, investors might 
liquidate assets elsewhere, potentially transmitting the shock to other market 
segments. Insurance companies could be quite vulnerable given their increased 
exposure to private credit (Box E). Second, firms that tap the market could find 
themselves squeezed, generating spillovers on their clients and the economy. Third, 
banks remain exposed to the sector, either directly or indirectly, not least as ultimate 
providers of liquidity.

Finally, a slowdown in the Chinese economy and troubles in its financial sector, 
particularly related to real estate, could spill over globally. The falling equity market

Commercial real estate (CRE) markets are smaller than residential real estate (RRE) markets, yet they present a 
greater risk to financial stability. Historically, it was losses on CRE, rather than RRE, that often caused financial 
crises.1 The Covid-19 pandemic generated a structural shift in the demand for CRE, particularly office space. 
Compounded by a rising interest rate environment, this put downward pressure on prices in the sector, 
reducing valuations and creating losses for lenders. Such losses have already started generating stress at some 
banks and other financial intermediaries. These losses are poised to weigh on profits and may cause further 
strains – a risk recognised by authorities in a number of countries.2

The post-pandemic shift in the CRE landscape has affected property values worldwide. Vacancy rates in 
office CRE have risen in many large cities in the past two years, especially in the United States and China 
(Graph C1.A). Higher vacancy rates depress rent revenues and put downward pressure on property prices. CRE 
prices have declined in many countries, particularly in the office sector, with the largest drops in US cities.

Declining CRE prices have increased the risk of default and losses at financial intermediaries. Banks’ 
non-performing CRE loans rose starting in 2022 (Graph C1.B). CRE makes up about 18% of bank loans in the 
United States, 12% in Germany and 10% in the Netherlands – countries where non-performing loans (NPLs) 
have risen sharply. While banks are typically the key lenders, non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs) have been 
playing a growing role and have seen risks materialise for example in commercial mortgage-backed securities 
(CMBS) (Graph C1.C).

In the United States, the impact on the financial system has not yet led to actual stress, as in past episodes. 
Vacancy rates are at an all-time high, bank lending standards have tightened, and thus far the decline in market 
returns for CRE investors has already exceeded that of the 1990 CRE stress (Graph C2.A). Despite this, however, 
credit to the CRE sector continues to expand, even at a faster pace than overall bank credit (same panel). This 
may stem in part from the distribution of CRE exposure and losses. While direct exposure to the CRE sector as 
a whole in the US banking system is largest at small and mid-sized banks, NPLs have thus far risen mainly among

the largest banks, which account for most lending to the office sector in large cities (Graph C2.B).3 Further, 
large banks have indirect exposure to CRE though the NBFIs they lend to, but also hold more capital and have 
more diversified business lines and income sources, and so are in a better position to absorb the losses.

Even so, stress could materialise. While NPLs remain relatively low for now, provisioning for CRE loans has 
not kept pace with the rise in NPLs in some banks.4 Furthermore, turnover of CRE properties was low in 2023, 
and so the true market value of many CRE assets is difficult to determine (Graph C2.C). The sustained CRE 
lending may reflect to some extent an “extend and pretend” strategy, as banks avoid crystallising losses in the 
near term in the hope of a reprieve from lower interest rates in the future. The recent divergence in prices 
between real estate investment trusts (REITs, traded on exchanges) and open end diversified core equity (ODCE) 
funds (only periodically appraised) suggests latent CRE losses throughout the financial system. This divergence 
not only points to artificially high valuations and unrecognised losses but also amplifies redemption pressures 
and increases the risk of a disorderly adjustment. Losses take time to materialise, and those that have been 
recognised were substantial in some cases, with price declines upwards of 40%.

While regulators have already identified many outlier banks, further vigilance is needed. Past CRE boom-bust 
cycles often preceded banking crises, such as in the case of Finland (1990), Japan (1991) and Thailand (1997), 
just to mention some of the more recent ones.5 And even if system-wide indicators look fine, lenders of 
different sizes are poised to suffer losses in their CRE portfolios. History has repeatedly shown that stress in a 
few banks in a seemingly isolated market segment can have systemic repercussions.

and capital outflow pressures were reflected in various indicators, including a widening 
cross-currency basis (Graph 15.B), which sent some warning signs about the state of 
the economy. And while policy support has provided an important backstop, it has

Sharp declines in real estate prices pose risk to outlook1 
Graph 14

B. A repeat today would disrupt the 
benign growth outlook

C. Stretched residential property 
valuations could add to risk

Chinese FX swap markets and riskiest loan segments point to stress1 
Graph 15

Both credit demand and supply contributed to the rapid growth of private credit over the past decade. On 
the demand side, unrated firms, including highly indebted companies or small and medium-sized enterprises, 
which may struggle or be reluctant to borrow from banks or to issue debt in public markets, have been able to 
borrow from private credit funds. Typically, lending terms are highly tailored to borrowers’ needs. Spreads are 
wider in private credit, reflecting in part the higher intrinsic credit risk of borrowers and the bespoke lending 
terms. In return, borrowers are not subject to the compliance costs imposed by securities regulation or banks’ 
lending standards.

On the supply side, high rates of return and portfolio diversification motives have made private credit an 
attractive asset class for long-term investors, particularly during the search-for-yield period in the low-for-long 
environment. Total returns on private credit assets outpaced those on comparable asset classes, such as 
syndicated leveraged loans (Graph D1.A, lines). In terms of portfolio diversification, private credit is attractive 
because it gives exposure to a set of risks with, presumably, low correlations to public markets, and because 
the underlying volatility is smoothed, since there is no real-time market pricing and the assets are valued

infrequently. Private credit fund managers thus raise capital from sophisticated long-term investors with minimal 
needs for immediate liquidity – mainly pension funds, insurance companies, endowment funds, sovereign 
wealth funds and family offices.2

Market intelligence suggests that private lenders proactively manage credit risk. They conduct wide-ranging 
due diligence to gain an understanding of borrowers’ business and cash flow profiles, with the associated 
costs passed on to the lending rates or as fees to investors. Further, private lenders protect themselves through 
senior secured loans with an extensive use of financial covenants. Where possible, outright defaults are 
avoided because lenders prefer to extend or restructure loans through cash flow-saving provisions.

Still, due to the opaqueness of the sector, it is difficult to fully understand and assess the risks involved and 
how they relate to measured returns.3 For example, the calculation of internal rates of return (IRRs) at any given 
time depends crucially on the valuation of the remaining assets in the fund portfolio, especially for recent 
vintages that are still far from completing their life cycle. While such valuation is straightforward in the case of 
tradable assets, in private credit it is often left to models developed by the fund managers themselves. Based 
on data for funds reporting to the US Securities and Exchange Commission, third-party valuations were 
conducted by only 40% of the reporting funds (Graph D1.B, dark red bar).

With these caveats in mind, recent academic evidence suggests that higher returns on private credit are 
entirely due to compensation for fees and for higher risks.4 Almost all funds charge management fees as a 
percentage of AUM (Graph D1.B, dark purple bar), typically 1.5–2%, and close to 90% of funds charge an 
additional performance fee, typically 15–20% of net profits. If so, the pricing of credit risk could explain why, 
even net of fees, the mean IRR of private credit funds is significantly higher than that of listed closed-end fund 
alternatives (Graph D1.C). That said, the credit risk could still be underestimated. A market estimate suggests 
that more than a third of borrowers from private credit funds saw their interest coverage ratio (ie net income 
to interest expense) fall below 1.5 in 2023, which could strain their debt servicing ability. And, in April 2024, 
Moody’s put three major private credit funds on negative outlook due to concerns about the credit quality of 
their underlying loans.

Difficulties in evaluating credit risk stems, in part, from the high dispersion in fund manager performance. 
For any of the reported vintages,5  the dispersion of private credit funds’ IRRs is much wider than that of 
comparable actively managed closed-end funds (Graph D1.C, min–max and interquartile range). Since most of 
these private credit fund managers have yet to be tested in a credit cycle downturn, the risks behind manager 
selection may be underestimated, especially at times of breakneck market expansion.

Another concern revolves around incentives. The close links of private credit with private equity raise 
questions about the incentive structures and the existence of proper internal corporate controls. For 
instance, in the United States 78% of private credit deal volume goes to private equity sponsored 
firms.6  Private credit funds have also issued loans to private equity funds collateralised with the funds’ 
underlying portfolio of companies. These so-called net asset value loans can have a variety of purposes, 
such as for bridge financing. However, they are also being used to accelerate distributions to private equity 
investors. While fund managers often invest their own capital in the vehicle (“skin in the game”), signalling 
the compatibility of managers’ incentives with investors’ interests, as many as 40% of the funds do not 
feature skin in the game (Graph D1.B. light blue bar). This suggests scope for incentive misalignment in a 
substantial segment of the sector.

Risks to financial stability from private credit warrant close monitoring. Mitigating factors include the still 
small size, low share in investors’ portfolios, low liquidity risks and low fund-level leverage. However, the direct 
and indirect interconnections with other parts of the financial system, especially banks, could amplify future 
shocks. Private credit is connected to the banking sector at least through: (i) contingent credit lines that banks 
provide; (ii) joint ventures, in which some banks originate and distribute the underlying portfolio asset while 
retaining skin in the game; and (iii) interest rate hedging, where banks serve as counterparties to firms seeking 
to hedge their floating-rate liabilities to private credit funds.

come at the cost of larger fiscal deficits and a build-up in government debt. A financially 
induced downturn in China could have a broader impact on market sentiment 
elsewhere, especially for EMEs closely related to China (Graph 15.C). AE banks exposed 
to the Chinese real estate sector could also find themselves struggling.

Expansionary fiscal policies could become a source of tension, with implications for 
inflation and macro-financial balances. As one possibility, an extended or renewed 
fiscal expansion could over-stimulate demand and complicate the disinflation task 
during the last mile.12 The risk is especially high in a year of many elections such as 
this one. Another related possibility is that fiscal sustainability concerns come to the 
fore and create headwinds through higher risk premia and financial market 
dysfunction. As discussed in last year’s Annual Economic Report, debt trajectories are 
a major concern globally going forward (Graph 16.A).

The environment of higher interest rates further weakens fiscal positions that 
are already stretched by historically high debt levels. Indeed, the support from the 
negative gap between real interest rates and growth rates (that is, r–g) has shrunk in 
recent years, is projected to stay much smaller going forward and could even turn 
positive (Graph 16.B, blue line). Curbing fiscal space further is rising public spending 
in the coming years (Graph 16.B, red line), given the needs stemming from the green 
transition, pensions and healthcare, and defence. Though financial market pricing 
points to only a small likelihood of public finance stress at present (Graph 16.C), 
confidence could quickly crumble if economic momentum weakens and an urgent 
need for public spending arises on both structural and cyclical fronts. Government 
bond markets would be hit first, but the strains could spread more broadly, as they 
have in the past.

Lacklustre productivity growth could be longer-lasting than previously thought. With 
few exceptions – notably the United States – productivity growth has generally been

The widespread surge in inflation and the subsequent increase in interest rates from 2022 have put the spotlight 
on the vulnerabilities that may have piled up for long-term investors during the low-for-long era. The business 
model of life insurance companies (ICs), which have traditionally focused on highly rated long-term debt, was 
particularly exposed to the post-Great Financial Crisis long phase of exceptionally low nominal interest rates. 
To mitigate pressure on their returns, some ICs increased their exposure to credit risk and reached out to 
alternative, often illiquid, investments. In addition, they complemented these strategies with measures to reduce 
capital-intensive life insurance policies.1 Examples include moving new business to unit-linked products (where 
risks are borne by the policyholder) or offloading risks to alternative investors, notably private equity (PE) 
companies, for example through reinsurance arrangements. This box looks into ICs’ exposure to credit risk, 
their rising interlinkages with PE companies and challenges for ICs’ liquidity risk management.

ICs’ credit risk has been at the fore over the past two years, as debt servicing costs have started to rise on 
the back of a persistent increase in interest rates. This is in addition to many ICs’ interest rate-induced valuation 
losses on their holdings of fixed income securities. To be sure, ICs’ focus on highly rated sovereign and corporate 
debt helps to shield them from credit losses. These exposures accounted for about 26% and 12% of major ICs’ 
total investment at end-2022, respectively.2  Even so, their exposure to more risky corporate debt and to 
securitised products (eg collateralised debt obligations) had already grown to around 12% on average by 2022, 
overwhelmingly reflecting investments that preceded the significant rise in interest rates. Moreover, major ICs 
with higher exposures are also more leveraged, on average, indicating a generally higher risk appetite.

ICs’ exposure to real estate, a sector typically vulnerable to higher interest rates, has been rising over the 
past several years as well. In Europe, for example, the sum of direct (eg real estate investments) and indirect

(eg mortgages) exposures to the real estate sector increased from less than 10% of total exposures at end-2017 
to more than 14% in the third quarter of 2023. Moreover, in some countries it exceeded 20% (Graph E1.A). 
Thus, significant setbacks in, say, the commercial real estate markets (see Box C) could weigh on ICs’ performance 
and capital.

Deeper interconnections between the life insurance sectors and private markets have raised additional 
challenges. On the one hand, seeking higher returns, many ICs have increased their exposure to private markets 
by investing in PE and private credit funds (see also Box D), although typically from low levels. On the other 
hand, easy funding conditions during the low-for-long era spurred PE companies’ expansion into the insurance 
sector: cumulative investments amounted to around $500 billion over the past decade, equivalent to about 10% 
of the global insurance industry’s total equity (Graph E1.B). In particular, ICs with major PE investors have sought 
to boost profitability by taking on higher leverage as well as by investing in more risky and illiquid assets.3

The higher interest rate environment has also shifted attention back to ICs’ funding profiles and liquidity 
management. The rise in returns offered by competing investments (eg investment funds, term deposits) 
provides incentives for policyholders to terminate (“surrender”) their contracts. This would force ICs to either 
raise the returns offered on policies or seek alternative sources of funding at higher cost. For major ICs, the 
potential for surrenders is substantial. At end-2022, policies that allow surrenders amounted on average to 
around 40% of total assets in emerging market economies (EMEs), North America and Europe and as much as 
70% in other advanced economies (AEs). In EMEs, the vast majority of these policies impose contractual penalties 
on policyholders, which provide a certain degree of protection to ICs. By contrast, for more than half of the 
policies in AEs, there are no economic penalties, and any protection relies primarily on tax treatments that raise 
the effective cost of surrenders for policyholders (Graph E1.C).4

ICs generally hold large amounts of liquid and high-quality assets to meet liquidity shocks. These mitigate 
the need to sell illiquid assets during episodes of market stress. However, only a small fraction of major ICs’ 
liquidity buffers are held in the form of cash. The majority are typically invested in high-quality fixed income 
assets (Graph E1.C, blue bars). Thus, in case of liquidity shortfalls, ICs’ liquidity management relies on the ability 
to borrow against or liquidate these assets quickly and at relatively small losses. The experience of past episodes 
of stress, such as the self-reinforcing acceleration of surrenders at a PE-owned European IC in early 2023, 
illustrates that such liquidations can prove challenging. It also highlights the importance of prudent liquidity 
risk management, such as assessing expected cash inflows and outflows under various stress scenarios and at 
different horizons.5

subdued since the pandemic, as employment held up growth (Graph 17). In the near 
term, the effects of the pandemic on productivity could linger for longer than 
expected, for example if strong demand for services continues to support 
employment in parts of the economy that have a lower level of productivity. This 
could keep overall labour productivity growth subdued (red bars), as has been the 
case especially in the euro area, even as hours per worker normalise (blue bars).

Indeed, while distinguishing cyclical from secular forces is not easy, slow trend 
productivity growth was already a concern pre-pandemic, not least owing to flagging 
structural reforms. Together with unfavourable demographic trends, slow productivity 
growth would weigh on potential growth.13 One symptom of these headwinds is 
that, for most economies, GDP growth rates have remained moderate, similar to 
pre-pandemic averages, and in some cases, they have slowed further (Graph 18.A). 
Lower productivity growth would add to inflationary pressures, reduce the headroom 
for both monetary and fiscal policy and, more generally, widen the gap between 
society’s expectations and policymakers’ capacity to meet them, making any 
adjustments much harder.

Could ongoing technological progress help counteract these growth headwinds, 
powered by greater use of remote work technologies, digitalisation and artificial

intelligence (Chapter III)? Possibly. But even so, these would likely generate uneven 
benefits across sectors and countries.14 The services sector arguably stands to gain 
the most from these technologies. As a result, the gap in labour productivity growth 
between the services and manufacturing sectors, which has already been narrowing 
since the mid-1990s, could close or even reverse (Graph 18.B). This could weigh on 
less diversified economies heavily reliant on manufacturing activities, particularly if 
they are slow to adapt to skills- and sector-biased technological advances.

A technology-driven productivity rotation could also have implications for price 
and wage dynamics over the longer term. One possibility is that relatively stronger 
productivity gains in the services sector pave the way for lower relative prices for 
services, as was the case for the manufacturing sector in past decades. If so, the 
inflation impact could be benign. Another possibility is that higher labour productivity 
allows services wages to increase. Indeed, there appears to be a stronger link between 
nominal wages and productivity in the services sector than in the manufacturing 
sector (Graph 18.C). In this case, broader wage pressures could ensue due to labour 
competition: goods-producing firms may need to bid up wages to prevent workers 
from leaving to the services sector. This could result in higher inflation.

Inflation has continued to ease, and a smooth landing is within sight. Under this 
central scenario, inflation will come down further in the period ahead to be consistent 
with central bank targets. As economic growth stabilises around the medium-term 
trend, the associated weakening of labour markets is expected to be modest, with 
outcomes that, from a historical perspective, look benign.

That said, risks on the horizon could push economies off course. Constellations 
of pressure points could come together to produce destabilising outcomes. Two 
plausible alternative scenarios, spanning a wide range of possibilities, illustrate 
pertinent policy trade-offs and challenges.

In the first scenario, inflation pushes higher again. This could arise most obviously 
from inflation pressure points giving way, whether from persistent relative price 
adjustments or adverse supply shocks (eg geopolitical events leading to an abrupt 
surge in commodity prices). Other pressure points could also increase the likelihood 
of this scenario or even instigate it, for example if fiscal policy turns overly 
expansionary, overall productivity growth disappoints or sectoral productivity 
developments push up wages. For small open economies, the additional trigger could 
be a sharp exchange rate depreciation, prompted by core AEs’ anticipated monetary 
policy response to stickier inflation, deteriorating inflation expectations or financial 
tensions giving rise to capital outflows.

The upward pressure on inflation from relative price adjustments alone could be 
sizeable. For illustrative purposes, consider the price adjustments that would be 
needed to restore the pre-pandemic relative price trend between core goods and 
services by the end of 2026. If core goods prices grow at the pre-pandemic average 
rate, then services price growth would need to be 1 percentage point higher than its 
historical norm, on average. With services accounting for around 50% of total 
consumption, this would mean that the overall rate of inflation would be around 
0.5 percentage points higher than otherwise (Graph 19.A). For some countries, the 
increase in services price growth to restore the pre-pandemic relative price trend 
could be as large as 3 percentage points, implying overall inflation would be up to 
1.5 percentage points higher than otherwise. And if core goods inflation is higher 
at 2%, for example due to diminishing tailwinds from cheap imports, overall 
inflation could increase by 1–2 percentage points on average for most countries. 
To prevent such a scenario from materialising, central banks would need to take 
further action.

Relative price adjustments could slow inflation’s convergence to target1

Additional annual price growth, in percentage points 
Graph 19

A. Additional price inflation if pre-pandemic trend in 
service prices relative to core goods prices is restored2 
 B. Additional price inflation if pre-pandemic trend in

Wages back to peak
Wages back to trend
Scenario interquartile range:

1 See technical annex for details. 2 Based on AEs only.

Sources: Ampudia et al (2024); LSEG Datastream; national data; BIS.

Real wages are another relative price that could materially add to inflationary 
pressures. To recoup the purchasing power lost due to the recent inflation wave, 
growth in nominal wages would need to outpace prices. This could put pressure on 
firms to pass on higher production costs to protect their margins, leading to higher 
inflation. Empirical estimates suggest that such pressures could materialise over 
roughly two and a half years for services and one and a half years for goods and 
they could be stronger in services (Graph 11.C above). All else equal, recouping the 
purchasing power lost since mid-2021 could add up to 0.75 percentage points to 
inflation in 2025 and up to 1.5 percentage points in 2026 (Graph 19.B, blue boxes). If 
wages were to grow even faster and catch up with their pre-pandemic trend, this 
could add up to 1.5 percentage points to inflation in 2025 and over 2.5 percentage 
points in 2026 (red boxes). In this case too, central banks would need to take further 
action to avert the scenario.

These calculations preclude the possibility of a full-blown wage-price spiral. As 
the pass-through of wages to prices is partial, these calculations assume some 
compression of profit margins that allows for wage growth to make up for the lost 
purchasing power. But it is plausible that, with marked increases in wages, firms 
could attempt to protect their margins and increasingly pass on the costs, thereby 
reinforcing the wage-price feedback loop. Estimates from a joint model of wages 
and consumer prices underline this two-way interaction, as shortfalls of wages from 
their long-run relationship with prices tend to feed back into prices, and vice-versa.15 
Estimates also show that wages and consumer prices chase each other with greater 
intensity as inflation rises.

The extent of these relative price adjustments, in combination with how other 
pressure points play out, would dictate the characteristics of an inflation resurgence.

One possibility is that multiple forces align to produce a strong inflation burst. 
For instance, the initial shocks, even if short-lived, could be amplified by key relative 
price adjustments to produce concentrated effects on highly salient prices for

households and firms. Further fiscal support for households and firms would make 
the inflationary impact larger and more enduring. The second-round effects, more 
likely to materialise in this case, could be more difficult to contain given the context 
of high inflation over the last few years. The urgency of re-establishing the credibility 
of inflation targets would regain prominence.

In another variant of this scenario, disinflation stalls and inflation hovers 
stubbornly above target even in the absence of large shocks. Key drivers could be 
persistent pressures from relative price adjustments and productivity developments. 
While the immediate impact on inflation may be smaller than in the first variant and 
relative price adjustment would be complete at some point, if inflation stays above 
target for long, the behavioural norms of workers and firms could change 
permanently. The feedback between wages and prices would then entrench higher 
inflation.

The inflationary scenario, especially the more virulent variant, would, in turn, 
represent a major threat to financial stability. Interest rates would go higher for 
longer, weighing heavily on financial conditions, economic agents’ balance sheets 
and ultimately economic activity (see below).

In the second scenario, inflation continues to ease as anticipated, but growth 
deteriorates sharply. The culprits could be some combination of real and financial 
tensions reaching a point of fracture, possibly amplifying one another. With private 
sector balance sheet buffers running out, fiscal sustainability attracting focus, or 
stresses emerging in key segments of the financial markets, growth could lose 
momentum. Much weaker economic activity would undermine the strength of the 
labour market, the linchpin of the economy, precipitating the hard landing that 
policymakers have so far taken great care to avoid.

A hard landing could generate strains on the financial system even in the absence 
of any policy tightening. Most immediate would be a further tightening of financial 
conditions, with wider risk spreads and a sell-off of global risky assets. More frequent 
bouts of market dysfunction could ensue, adding to stress for financial institutions 
and investors. Tighter financial conditions and retrenchment in credit supply could, 
in turn, accelerate the depletion of borrowers’ financial buffers, possibly impairing 
credit quality. A hard landing would entail both demand headwinds and heightened 
financial stability risks.

A hard-landing scenario could furthermore mask the role of secular supply-side 
developments taking place concurrently. The effects of any productivity slowdown or 
developments of other structural factors on growth would be all but concealed in the 
midst of strong demand headwinds. Determining the degree of economic slack would 
be even more challenging.

Any policy prescription depends on the balance of risks to the outlook. Although risks 
will vary across economies, some general considerations, informed by the lessons 
from recent decades, could help guide policy (see also Chapter II).

First, policies adopted today need to be robust to key risks on the horizon. In the 
spirit of robust control theory, the policy stance should deliver reasonable outcomes 
in a broad range of conceivable scenarios.

Second, in addressing near-term challenges, policymakers should be cognisant 
of any longer-term costs or side effects of their policy actions. Often, these costs may 
become evident only in the longer term, giving rise to intertemporal trade-offs that 
must be taken into consideration. Complementary policies, such as macroprudential 
measures and, where appropriate, foreign exchange interventions, can be used to 
mitigate these costs or side effects.

Third, and in the same spirit, policies should explicitly consider the importance 
of having sufficient safety margins or room for manoeuvre. This would bolster resilience 
by allowing policies to deal more effectively with the future materialisation of risks.

What do these considerations suggest for current policy settings? How could 
policymakers best navigate the risks of an inflation resurgence, on the one hand, and 
a hard landing, on the other?

The primacy of price stability as a pre-condition for sustainable growth cautions 
against a rapid and substantial easing of policy. Policy rates will need to stay high for 
as long as needed to re-establish price stability. A premature easing could reignite 
inflationary pressures and force a costly policy reversal – all the costlier because 
credibility would be undermined.16 Indeed, risks of de-anchored inflation expectations 
have not gone away, as pressure points remain. Macroeconomic and financial 
stability would be most vulnerable in this event. To guard against it, monetary policy 
needs to prioritise a sustainable return of inflation to target.

The need to preserve some policy space further underscores the case for a 
cautious policy approach. Stop-and-go policies should be avoided, as they could 
weaken central banks’ abilities to address resurgent inflation. Most central banks 
have now regained the room for policy manoeuvre to face possible downturns – a 
silver lining from the recent flare-up of inflation and consistent with some goals of 
monetary policy framework reviews (Chapter II). In this sense, setting a high bar for 
policy easing is reasonably robust to the two adverse scenarios: it hedges against an 
inflation resurgence, and it provides room for manoeuvre in the event of a hard 
landing.

Conserving policy space also calls for a circumspect assessment of what is 
sometimes seen as determining the end point for interest rates (or “terminal rate”). 
This is technically known as the natural rate of interest or r-star (Chapter II). As the 
available evidence is inconclusive,17 it would be highly imprudent to conclude that 
real interest rates must inevitably gravitate towards the ultra-low levels seen in the 
decade prior to the pandemic based on the view that these were necessarily 
equilibrium rates produced by deep-seated structural forces. There is simply too 
much uncertainty about the determinants of such equilibrium rates and their level at 
any given point in time. The cautious approach to policy easing would be robust to 
r-star uncertainty as well.

A cautious easing approach would also be consistent with central banks striking 
a good balance between keeping near-term macro-financial stresses at bay and 
promoting a less leveraged and more stable financial system in the longer term. 
Admittedly, easing monetary policy quickly at the sign of lower inflation may help 
pre-empt financial stresses and improve the prospect of a smooth landing in the very 
near term. But it could also fuel financial risk-taking and contribute to the build-up of 
financial imbalances down the road. The juncture offers a rare window of opportunity 
to wean economies off the long-standing dependence of growth on monetary policy 
and to lessen the likelihood of another era of low-for-long interest rates.

EMEs and small open economies can make their cautious easing approach more 
robust by judiciously deploying foreign exchange intervention, where necessary and

appropriate, to shield against destabilising external developments. The pressure to 
do so could build as macroeconomic outlooks diverge across economies and interest 
rate differentials widen. On the bright side, many central banks today are better 
positioned to manage these external risks. Stronger policy frameworks, underpinned 
by central bank independence and foreign exchange reserve buffers, lessen the scope 
for sudden capital flight or runaway exchange rate depreciation. At the same time, 
there are limits to what foreign exchange intervention can achieve. It is no substitute 
for necessary macroeconomic adjustments and sound monetary and fiscal policy 
settings. A guiding consideration is to deploy foreign exchange intervention as a 
complementary tool akin in orientation to macroprudential ones (Chapter II).

Prudential policy must remain vigilant and continue to strengthen the soundness of 
the financial system. The resilience of the system so far is in no small measure 
because of improvements in its loss-absorption capacity and governance. But it also 
reflects a surprisingly buoyant real sector. That resilience should not be taken for 
granted, especially as the economy could slow more than expected and asset price 
adjustments need to run their course. So far, the strains that have appeared have 
reflected mainly the materialisation of interest rate risk; credit losses are still largely 
to come.

It is crucial to avoid a premature easing of macroprudential policies. The evidence 
strongly indicates that tightening macroprudential measures can help reduce the 
likelihood of financial stress even once the monetary policy tightening phase is under 
way (Chapter II). Measures should be relaxed, releasing buffers if and only when signs 
of stress emerge: the measures are designed to address the financial cycle and 
financial stability, not shorter-term economic fluctuations as such. Beyond that, their 
adjustment will naturally depend on country-specific circumstances, as the cycles are 
not synchronised internationally and the impact of global financial conditions on 
individual jurisdictions varies.

At the microprudential level, there is need for action on two fronts. From a more 
conjunctural perspective, authorities need to stand ready to take prompt and 
preventive measures to minimise the likelihood of the emergence of stress. Tight 
supervisory scrutiny is of the essence. From a longer-term perspective, the priority is 
to continue to implement the agreed reforms to further enhance the resilience of the 
system. This includes the timely, full and consistent implementation of Basel III. It also 
involves further efforts to implement the agenda concerning recovery and resolution 
mechanisms and to strengthen the regulation of non-bank financial institutions 
(NBFIs) from a systemic (macroprudential) perspective.18

Strengthening the macroprudential regulation of the NBFI sector has met with 
significant difficulties. This applies, in particular, to some forms of asset management 
and private credit, where hidden leverage and liquidity mismatches are prevalent. 
Efforts have been under way since the GFC at both national and international levels. 
But the results have been modest so far. Making substantial progress may require 
more incisive steps, not least to include financial stability as an explicit objective in 
the mandate of securities regulators.

For fiscal policy, consolidation is an absolute priority. In the near term, this would help 
relieve pressure on inflation and lessen the need to keep interest rates high, in turn 
helping to preserve financial stability. The higher fiscal burdens under the inflation 
resurgence or hard landing scenarios further argue for consolidation to conserve

near-term policy space. Meanwhile, in the longer term, the urgency to consolidate 
continues to grow given the historically high debt and the outlook for higher interest 
rates.19

The window of opportunity to take decisive action is narrowing. For example, as 
of last year, AEs would have needed to keep budget deficits below 1.6% of GDP to 
stabilise public debt; today, that number is 1% of GDP.20 And the room for fiscal policy 
manoeuvre is rapidly shrinking. Looming ahead are much larger spending needs 
related to healthcare and pensions – given demographic trends – and the green 
transition and defence – considering the geopolitical landscape.

Multi-pronged consolidation strategies are called for, with an emphasis tailored 
to country-specific circumstances.

On the expenditure side, it is important to scale back discretionary measures, by 
terminating those enacted during the pandemic and refraining from new fiscal 
stimulus in the absence of compelling macroeconomic justifications. More 
ambitiously, there is a need to press ahead with social spending reform to better align 
fiscal obligations with fiscal sustainability. Prioritising growth-enhancing spending, 
for example on the green transition, human capital and structural reforms, would also 
help improve efficiency as long as that spending is executed effectively. Bringing in 
private capital to help meet long-term objectives could create additional policy space.

On the income side, governments need to strengthen revenue mobilisation 
further by expediting tax reforms and broadening tax bases. For example, the 
implementation of a minimum corporate tax rate for large multinational companies 
is a welcome step in that direction. In EMEs, where the informal sector tends to be 
larger and tax bases smaller, stronger enforcement and simpler tax codes would help 
increase revenue collection.

Last but not least, and considering the limited scope of monetary and fiscal policies 
to boost potential output, structural policies need to play a crucial role in promoting 
sustainable growth.21 Only structural policies can strengthen the supply side of the 
economy, which holds the key to long-run economic well-being. Informed by recent 
experience, policymakers should recognise the importance of enhancing not only the 
level but also the resilience of growth. Stepping up structural reforms has gained 
particular urgency given the rapid global shifts on multiple fronts, ranging from 
technology to the green transition and to global trade. With so much at stake, 
delaying and falling short is a luxury no country can afford.

Structural reforms should aim to create an environment in which supply-side 
forces can play their full role. This means promoting competition, enhancing labour 
and product market flexibility, and spurring innovation. It also means a judicious 
deployment of scarce public funds to support the economy’s adjustment to the new 
realities. In all this, there is also room for international dialogue to forge consensus 
on blueprints and best practices, not least in response to emerging priorities such as 
climate change and artificial intelligence. After all, these pose common challenges to 
humanity, and overcoming them will benefit everyone.

5 
The long-run trend reflects the confluence of several factors. First, a higher 
income elasticity of services: as income per capita rises, so does the relative 
demand for services and hence their relative price. Second, in what is commonly 
known as the Baumol cost disease, the services sector competes for labour with 
the higher-productivity manufacturing sector and, given the need to offer similar 
wages, must charge higher relative prices to compensate for the productivity 
gap. Third, international competition has a more pronounced effect on prices of 
goods than those of services.

13 
Inefficient resource allocations, in addition to macroeconomic factors, could also 
contribute to weak productivity. See IMF (2024a, Chapter 3) and Andrews et al 
(2015).

14 
Acemoglu (2024) argues that artificial intelligence advances may generate only 
a modest boost to total factor productivity, only 0.5–0.7% over 10 years, while 
increasing inequality and widening the gap between capital and labour incomes. 
Meanwhile, Brynjolfsson et al (2023) show in an experimental setting that the 
use of generative AI tools in a customer service context could boost productivity 
by 14% on average.

16 
Policy credibility is a key part of trust in public policy, which, once lost, can be 
difficult to regain. See Carstens (2024).

II. Monetary policy in the 21st century: lessons 
learned and challenges ahead

• 
Since the turn of the 21st century, a series of extraordinary events – major financial crises, a pandemic 
and an unexpected surge in inflation – have profoundly shaped the conduct of monetary policy.

• 
This tumultuous experience points to several lessons regarding what monetary policy can and cannot 
deliver. They concern the ability to control runaway inflation, the power to stabilise the financial system 
at times of crises, the limits to forceful and prolonged monetary easing, the growing complexity of 
communication, and the complementary role of foreign exchange (FX) intervention and macroprudential 
policies.

• 
The lessons point to a number of key considerations that could guide monetary policy in the years 
ahead. These stress the importance of robustness, realism in ambition, safety margins and nimbleness. 
Coherence across policy domains is essential to ensure the lasting achievement of macroeconomic 
and financial stability.

Since the turn of the 21st century, a series of extraordinary events have severely tested 
the conduct of monetary policy. The Great Financial Crisis (GFC) and the subsequent 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area shattered the deceptive tranquillity of the 
so-called Great Moderation – the decades-long phase of low output and inflation 
volatility enjoyed by most advanced economies (AEs). The subsequent decade saw 
central banks struggle to push inflation back to target before, like a bolt from the 
blue, the Covid-19 pandemic once again caused widespread financial system stress 
and plunged economies into a deep recession. The pandemic’s aftermath, complicated 
by geopolitical events, saw the largest and most persistent inflationary outbreak in 
half a century, alongside bank strains on both sides of the Atlantic.

Central banks have risen to the challenge. Their forceful and repeated responses 
to financial stress stabilised the system and limited the damage to the economy. The 
shortfall of inflation from targets always remained contained. And following vigorous 
global tightening of the policy stance, inflation is now again returning to the price 
stability region while economic activity and labour markets have proved resilient 
(Chapter I).

These extraordinary events have left a deep imprint on the conduct of policy. 
Central bank responses have been unprecedented. Even before the pandemic, 
nominal policy rates had reached historical troughs, in some cases even hovering in 
negative territory. And central bank balance sheets have climbed to historical peaks, 
within ranges previously seen only during wars. Moreover, looking ahead, further 
challenges loom. Public debt is on a worrisome trajectory around the world and 
several structural forces, such as deglobalisation, ageing societies and the uncertainties 
of the green transition, could further complicate policy.

This chapter stands back and takes stock of this tumultuous historical phase. After 
summarising the key developments, it draws lessons from the conduct of monetary

policy, fleshing out what has been learned about the effectiveness of strategies and 
tools. Based on these lessons, it then identifies a number of key considerations that 
could guide monetary policy in the years ahead and, where appropriate, help refine 
frameworks. These considerations stress the importance of robustness, realism in 
ambition, safety margins, nimbleness as well as the complementary role of other policies.

The conduct of monetary policy in the 21st century can be broadly classified into 
two phases: (i) the GFC in AEs and its aftermath; and (ii) the global outbreak of the 
Covid-19 pandemic and its consequences. The two phases saw very different 
macroeconomic challenges, which deeply shaped the policy response (Graph 1).

The GFC marked the end of the so-called Great Moderation – a period of 
remarkable macroeconomic stability, at least in advanced economies, that began in 
the mid-1980s. Under the surface of stable inflation and growth, however, financial 
vulnerabilities were building up, in particular in core AE housing and mortgage 
markets. Credit was surging, asset prices were booming, and balance sheets were 
becoming overstretched. The financial system looked deceptively strong, and its ever 
greater sophistication was mistaken for resilience. The build-up of vulnerabilities was 
reinforced by low nominal and real interest rates, as central banks eased policy in 
response to the fallout of the bursting of the dotcom bubble in 2001 and had little 
reason to raise them much subsequently, given subdued inflation. In the background, 
prudential regulation and supervision had failed to keep up with developments.

The subsequent unwinding of financial imbalances ushered in the GFC and 
plunged many economies into the deepest recession since the Great Depression. 
Matters came to a head when the US investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for 
bankruptcy in September 2008. Many financial institutions teetered on the verge of 
insolvency, large segments of funding markets froze, and asset prices collapsed.

Central banks responded forcefully. They cut policy rates aggressively and 
activated their balance sheets to provide badly needed support (Graph 2). In the early

Sources: IMF; OECD; Global Financial Data; national data; BIS.

Central bank balance sheet size and composition1 
Graph 2

A. Federal Reserve 
B. Eurosystem 
C. Bank of Japan 
D. Bank of England

Sources: ECB; Bank of Japan; Bank of England; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Bloomberg; LSEG Datastream; national data; 
BIS.

phase of the crisis, they stepped in to provide liquidity to the financial sector, playing 
their role of lenders of last resort, often drawing on governments’ solvency backing. 
Thus, the initial increase in major central banks’ balance sheets largely took the form of 
lending to financial institutions. Subsequently, several central banks started large-scale 
asset purchases (LSAPs) to further ease financial conditions. As a result, their balance 
sheets expanded further, driven by large holdings of long-term bonds, notably 
government bonds, often financed by bank reserves (“quantitative easing” (QE)).

Once the post-GFC years saw a shallow economic recovery and persistent 
shortfalls of inflation from target, raising concerns about deflation, AE central banks 
engaged in an unprecedented forceful and prolonged monetary easing. In doing so, 
they naturally built on the same toolkit that they had deployed to contain the crisis 
and sought to influence financial conditions beyond the short-term interest rate more 
directly. They lowered policy rates to zero and sometimes even into negative territory; 
they resorted to forward guidance to signal their commitment to keep policy rates 
low for long; and they further expanded their LSAPs, sometimes including private 
sector assets such as corporate bonds or equity exchange-traded funds.

The Covid-19 pandemic abruptly ended an incipient monetary policy 
normalisation. As the global economy was put in hibernation to forestall a public 
health catastrophe, a deep economic contraction put the stability of the financial 
system at risk. Once again, central banks moved swiftly and forcefully to prevent 
financial collapse and restore confidence. They cut policy rates, where still possible, 
and launched new balance sheet measures, combining emergency or subsidised 
lending to banks with bond purchase programmes. In the wake of these measures, 
central bank balance sheets surged to new historical highs.

As the global economy rebounded from the pandemic, central banks faced an 
enemy they thought they had long defeated for good – a global outbreak of inflation, 
in many cases well into double digits. Supply had failed to respond elastically to the 
partly monetary and fiscal policy-induced recovery in demand and the major rotation 
of that demand from services to goods. The subsequent steep commodity price 
increases in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine further fuelled the inflation 
surge.

Crises, FX reserves and macroprudential measures1 
Graph 3

A. Inflation and crises2 
B. US dollar index and capital flows 
C. FX reserves and macroprudential 
tightening measures

yoy, % 
No of crises 
Jan 
 
2006 = 100 
USD bn 
USD trn 
No of net tightenings

Asian EMEs excl CN
Latin America
Other EMEs

1 See technical annex for details. 2 Latest is 2023 for inflation and 2017 for crises. 3 An increase indicates an appreciation of the US
dollar. 4 Cumulative sum of net tightening decisions across 17 macroprudential tools, average across economies.

Sources: Alam et al (2019); Laeven and Valencia (2020); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis; 
IMF; LSEG Datastream; national data; BIS.

Once it became clear that the inflation surge was not transitory and was raising 
the risk of a transition to a high-inflation regime, central banks responded forcefully. 
They embarked on the sharpest and globally most synchronised monetary tightening 
in a generation. They hiked policy rates strongly, at least in nominal terms, and began 
to shrink their balance sheets – so-called quantitative tightening.

This big picture summary of events since the beginning of the century hints at 
some significant differences between AEs and emerging market economies (EMEs). 
To be sure, just like AEs, EMEs battled the Covid-19 crisis and the subsequent inflation 
surge. But they were largely spared the travails of banking crises such as the GFC or 
sovereign crises such as the one in the euro area (Graph 3.A). Their enduring challenge 
was coping with swings in capital flows and exchange rates originating primarily from 
developments in AEs, not least due to the post-GFC extraordinary monetary easing 
in major AEs (Graph 3.B). These trends reversed sharply as the Federal Reserve took 
the first steps to normalise policy in 2013.

EME central banks weathered these challenges by relying on broad-based policy 
frameworks honed following their own crises in the early to mid-1990s. The frameworks 
often combined inflation targeting and greater exchange flexibility with varying 
degrees of FX intervention and active deployment of macroprudential tools 
(Graph 3.C).1 This represented a major welcome shift from previous frameworks that 
had helped generate the conditions of the EME crises pre-2000.

Looking back at the experience since the GFC as well as the build-up to it, it is possible 
to draw lessons about the conduct of monetary policy and complementary tools

under the central banks’ influence. These lessons underscore the power of monetary 
policy but also shed light on its limitations, some of which were less appreciated 
during the period of the Great Moderation. The five lessons pertain, respectively, to 
central banks’ ability to fight inflation; their ability to tackle financial system stress; 
the impact of prolonged easing; communication; and the deployment of tools such 
as FX intervention – part of the monetary policy toolkit – and macroprudential 
measures.

Central banks can forestall inflation de-anchoring

The post-pandemic experience with inflation has shown once again one of the major 
strengths of monetary policy. In particular, it has highlighted how forceful monetary 
tightening can prevent high inflation from becoming entrenched. It has also 
confirmed central banks’ determination to avoid a repeat of the experience of the 
Great Inflation of the 1970s.

Admittedly, central banks, like most observers, were taken by surprise by the 
global inflation surge. The prevailing consensus was that the supply restrictions might 
raise prices, but that the post-pandemic environment would remain disinflationary: if 
anything, the pandemic-induced psychological and financial scars would depress 
demand and keep prices under pressure for years to come. There was initially also an 
underappreciation of the inflationary implications of the large demand stimulus from 
the monetary and fiscal policy response to the pandemic.2 This, in turn, reflected the 
difficulties in calibrating the response to those exceptional circumstances.

Moreover, it took some time for central banks to react. Initially, they judged the 
inflationary pressures to be temporary. In addition, the forward guidance they had 
provided to nurture the recovery may also have played a role, as may have the reviews 
of monetary policy frameworks that several major central banks completed at the 
time. They envisaged a world of persistent disinflationary pressures, in which the core 
problem would still be how to push inflation back to target and pre-empt a downward 
drift in inflation expectations. After such a long period of stubborn shortfalls from 
target, inflation overshoots could actually be helpful in that regard as long as they 
remained contained.

As soon as central banks realised that inflation threatened to become unmoored, 
they were quick to react and recover the ground lost. Hence the most intense and 
synchronised tightening in decades. In the end, the timing of this tightening did not 
prove crucial. True, countries that responded earlier gained precious room for policy 
manoeuvre, most notably those in Latin America with a longer inflation history. But, on 
balance, inflation outcomes did not vary systematically with the timing of the first hike. 
The global nature of the inflationary forces swamped the slight differences in timing.

The forceful response was justified by the nature of the inflation process. 
Evidence indicates that it is useful to think of inflation as evolving differently in a 
low- and a high-inflation regime, with transitions from low- to high-inflation regimes 
tending to be self-reinforcing.3

In a low-inflation regime, inflation has important self-stabilising properties. 
What is measured as inflation is, in fact, largely the result of idiosyncratic or 
sector-specific price changes that leave little imprint on the inflation rate itself. That 
is, the co-movement of prices, or the “common component” of price changes, is 
small. And wages and prices are only loosely linked.

By contrast, a high-inflation regime has no such self-stabilising properties. The 
common component of price changes is higher, and wages and prices are much more 
closely linked (Graph 4.A). As a result, inflation becomes more responsive to one-off 
inflationary shocks, such as increases in commodity prices or sharp depreciations of 
the exchange rate.

Low- versus high-inflation regimes1 
Graph 4

A. Feedback effects between wages and prices 
 B. Similarity of price changes2

Twelve-month headline inflation (%, log scale)

Transitions from low- to high-inflation regimes are self-reinforcing for several 
reasons. For one, inflation moves from the region of rational inattention, in which it 
is hardly noticed, into that of sharp focus. In addition, inflation becomes more 
representative: as the co-movement of prices increases (Graph 4.B), the inflation rates 
that different agents experience become more similar. Thus, inflation becomes a 
more relevant focal point and coordinating device for the decisions of economic 
agents. And the longer inflation remains high, the greater the risk that behaviour 
adjusts, entrenching an inflation psychology.

Monetary policy has contributed to bringing inflation under control in two ways 
(Chapter I). First, it has compressed aggregate demand relative to what it would 
otherwise have been. The resilience of economic activity and tightness of labour 
markets suggest that the compression of aggregate demand has also been supported 
by an increase in supply. Second, the commitment to bringing inflation under control 
provided a strong signal to markets, firms and workers that the central bank would 
do what it took to restore price stability. This helped prevent an inflation psychology 
from setting in, with behaviour adjusting to a high-inflation regime.

A look at simple models and at previous historical experience sheds light on the 
key role of policy.4 Graph 5.A illustrates simulations based on a model in which 
inflation expectations are influenced by inflation outcomes rather than being 
mechanically linked to the central bank’s inflation target. Tightening monetary policy 
during an inflation surge is critical to prevent a de-anchoring of inflation expectations 
and avoid a transition to a high-inflation regime. This is broadly consistent with 
experience in the early 1970s, when a smaller and shorter-lived monetary policy 
response failed to prevent a shift to a high-inflation regime (Graph 5.B).

Central banks can stabilise the financial system in times of stress

The events of the past two decades have confirmed once again that central banks 
play a key role in the management of financial crises. During episodes of financial 
stress, stabilising the financial system is essential to prevent the economy from falling

into a tailspin. As central banks are the ultimate source of liquidity, their actions are 
critical to boost confidence, tackle market dysfunction and support the flow of credit 
to firms and households. Thus, by deploying their firepower effectively, central banks 
can not only prevent inflation from becoming entrenched but also tackle a key source 
of deflationary pressures – major financial crises.

While at such times policy rates are typically cut, it is the forceful deployment of 
the balance sheet that does the heavy lifting. Following the GFC and the Covid-19 
crisis, central banks deployed a whole range of tools.5 Reflecting the nature of the 
shock, the response to the Covid-19 crisis was even broader than that to the GFC and 
more heavily tilted towards markets.

Underlying the criticality of confidence, the evidence confirms that announcements 
play a key role in stabilising the system, well beyond the actual deployment of 
tools.6  A credible announcement signals the central bank’s willingness to take the 
necessary actions to tackle dysfunctions. As an illustration, Graph 6.A documents the 
major impact of the announcement of LSAPs during the GFC, Mario Draghi’s 
“whatever it takes” statement during the euro area sovereign debt crisis and the 
Federal Reserve’s announcement of several measures during the Covid-19 crisis.

Episodes of financial stress also confirmed the importance of providing liquidity 
in foreign currency, highlighting the need for central bank cooperation. Here, 
international currencies are front and centre, especially the US dollar globally and 
the euro on a more regional scale.7 Self-insurance through the build-up of FX 
reserves helps but only up to a point (see below). Swap lines were repeatedly and 
effectively used to alleviate dollar funding shortages. During the GFC, the swap lines 
helped avoid the meltdown of the global financial system,8 and they again played a 
key role during the euro area sovereign debt crisis and the Covid-19 crisis. For 
example, during the Covid crisis, the announcement of better terms on the standing 
swap lines between five central banks and their reopening with nine others had an 
immediate impact on the US dollar FX swap basis – an indicator of global dollar 
funding conditions (Graph 6.B).9 The basis narrowed further as these swap lines were

The financial crises also saw an important evolution in the role that central 
banks play in crisis management. Historically, central banks had focused on providing 
emergency funding to financial institutions, largely banks – the standard lender of last 
resort function. But that role could no longer suffice given the rapid growth of financial 
markets, of more complex financial instruments and of non-bank financial institutions 
(NBFIs).10 The setting up of asset purchase facilities also turned central banks into de 
facto market-makers or buyers of last resort and brought them into closer contact with 
non-banks, including investment vehicles.11 This allowed them to have a more direct 
impact on both funding spreads and secondary market spreads (Graphs 7.A and 7.B). 
In EMEs, this function was especially important during the pandemic, to alleviate market 
stress in domestic currency bond markets as foreign investors retreated (Graph 7.C).12

While successful, central bank interventions also pointed once again to certain 
limitations.

For one, liquidity provision alone is insufficient when broader solvency concerns 
are present. Hence the need to draw on government support, as the sovereign is the 
ultimate backstop of the financial system. For example, during both the GFC and 
Covid-19 crisis, government support through extensive guarantees and other measures 
was crucial to allow central banks to extend longer-term funding and assume credit 
risk.13 All this puts a premium on close cooperation. At the same time, it can raise 
delicate issues related to the relationship between the central bank and the 
government and their interlocking balance sheets. These issues can complicate the 
conduct of monetary policy in more normal times.14

In addition, and relatedly, interventions are not costless. Directly or indirectly, the 
central bank typically puts its balance sheet at risk, absorbing risks that the private 
sector is unable or unwilling to take on. Moreover, the calibration of the support is 
difficult, and there is a natural tendency to err on the side of doing too much rather 
than too little. In turn, the expectation of such interventions in the future can temper 
market discipline and fuel risk-taking – moral hazard.15 The issue is especially relevant 
when central banks purchase assets outright, absorbing risk more directly. The 
standard way to limit moral hazard is by ensuring that risks are adequately priced 
and borne by market participants, especially through regulation, but this has proved 
especially hard in the NBFI sector (Chapter I).

Prolonged monetary easing runs into limits

If the post-pandemic fight against inflation and the management of two major 
episodes of stress highlighted the strengths of monetary policy, the post-GFC years 
also brought to light some of its limitations. To be sure, the post-GFC unprecedented 
phase of monetary easing through a wide range of new tools was instrumental in 
promoting economic recovery and maintaining price stability. That said, as time wore 
on, some limitations that had tended to be underplayed at the outset became more 
evident.16 These include, in particular, signs of reduced traction as well as longer-term 
side effects on the financial system and the economy.

The empirical evidence clearly indicates that unconventional policy measures allowed 
central banks to ease financial conditions much further.17 Large-scale asset purchases

helped compress risk (term and credit) premia and, by underlining central banks’ 
willingness to keep interest rates low, influenced expectations of policy rates further 
out in the future – the signalling channel.18 Forward guidance helped shape those 
expectations more directly and, by reducing uncertainty about the policy rate path, 
compressed risk premia too. Negative interest rates were transmitted to money 
market and capital market rates very much like other policy rate cuts, thereby also 
having a similar impact on the exchange rate. And special lending programmes 
supported banks’ profitability and encouraged lending.

At the same time, the evidence also points to some limitations.19 They concern 
the impact on financial conditions and that of financial conditions on economic 
activity and inflation.

Some of the limitations regarding the influence on financial conditions are 
instrument-specific. The power of LSAPs is weaker when markets are not under 
stress, as the emergency support role of the central bank is not at work.20  That 
power also appears to wane at the margin as purchases grow, although the evidence 
here may also reflect difficulties in identifying the “surprise” element if the central 
bank becomes more predictable (Box A).21 The pass-through of negative interest 
rates to the rates charged by intermediaries has proven to be somewhat weaker 
than that to money and capital market rates. This has particularly been the case for 
deposit rates, given banks’ reluctance to cut them below zero, especially for retail 
depositors. And special lending schemes may not always have encouraged the 
targeted lending.22

Other limitations regarding the influence on financial conditions are of a more 
general nature. There are limits to how far risk premia can be compressed, to how far 
central banks can commit to keeping interest rates low in future and to how far they 
can push rates into negative territory – and do so without unnerving private market 
participants, potentially signalling dire conditions or weakening intermediation. For 
instance, this may be a reason why the impact of monetary easing on bank lending 
appears to diminish when interest rates are very low for long periods.23

A sense of diminishing returns to strong and prolonged easing also comes from 
the behaviour of the economy and inflation. There is evidence that easing had a 
lesser impact on real activity after the GFC compared with the preceding decades 
(Graph  8.A).24 One important reason is that financial recessions blow powerful 
headwinds. Agents give priority to repairing balance sheets and it takes time for 
resources to be reallocated and for the capital overhang to be reabsorbed.25 In 
addition, broader factors appear to have been at work.

One factor is that low interest rates may lose traction on economic activity as 
they reach low levels and stay there. There may be several reasons for this. Not least, 
there are limits to the extent to which expenditure may be brought forward from the 
future. Moreover, a few basis points may hardly be noticed once borrowing costs are 
already very low; sticky hurdle rates for investment are a case in point. Empirical 
evidence is consistent with this loss of traction.26 It shows a weaker impact at the 
margin in a very low interest rate environment even when controlling for phases of 
economic recession and high debt (Graph 8.B).

Similarly, there is evidence that in a low-inflation regime, inflation becomes less 
sensitive to monetary policy easing.27 One possible reason is that, as low inflation 
becomes entrenched, the common component of price changes drops substantially 
(Graph 9.A), and this is the component on which changes in the monetary policy 
stance mainly operate. It is the one closely linked to economy-wide forces such as 
aggregate demand or the exchange rate. Indeed, monetary policy surprises appear 
to have a persistent impact on the common component of price changes (Graph 9.B) 
but a much more limited one on the idiosyncratic elements (Graph 9.C). Consistent 
with this finding, in a low-inflation regime, monetary policy appears to operate