1 
The ECB’s monetary policy curbed inflationary pressures 
8

1.1 
Global growth remained resilient despite a shift in US trade 
policy 
8

1.2 
Economic activity held up despite high global uncertainty 
12

1.3 
Need for prioritisation in public spending at times of limited fiscal 
space 
16

1.4 
Inflation moved towards the 2% medium-term target over the 
course of the year 
18

1.5 
Credit recovery remained weak, despite a further easing in 
financing conditions 
22

2 
A data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to setting 
interest rates 
30

2.2 
Normalisation of the Eurosystem balance sheet progressed 
further 
36

3 
European financial sector: navigating heightened geopolitical and 
market risks amid structural challenges 
45

3.2 
Macroprudential policy: preserving resilience in an uncertain 
environment 
48

3.3 
Microprudential activities to ensure the soundness of individual 
banks 
51

3.4 
The ECB’s contribution to European financial sector policy 
initiatives 
53

4 
Smooth functioning of market infrastructure and payments 
58

4.2 
Shaping Europe’s payments and market infrastructure of 
tomorrow 
60

Box 5 Fostering the development of a European digital asset

6 
Making euro cash fit for the future 
70

6.2 
Enhancement of the cash legal framework 
71

In 2025 the ECB succeeded in bringing inflation back in line with its medium-term 
target of 2%, after a succession of crises – the pandemic, the economic fallout of 
Russia’s unjustified invasion of Ukraine – had driven it to record highs in late 2022.

In response to the largest inflation shock in a generation, the ECB implemented the 
sharpest tightening of monetary policy in its history, increasing policy rates by a 
record 450 basis points between July 2022 and September 2023 and pledging to 
keep rates at sufficiently restrictive levels for as long as necessary.

That tightening worked. Inflation in the euro area fell sharply, and from mid-2024 the 
ECB began gradually dialling back its monetary policy restriction. At the start of 
2025, the disinflation process was well on track and the ECB’s projections foresaw 
inflation returning to target.

But the year brought a major geopolitical shock. The United States, Europe’s largest 
export market, surrounded itself with a tariff wall – a move that threatened to weigh 
on euro area growth and one that made the inflation outlook considerably more 
uncertain.

As it happened, the inflationary effects were contained. Europe refrained from large-
scale retaliation, and the appreciation of the euro exchange rate dampened imported 
price pressures.

With inflation continuing on its projected path, the Governing Council was able to 
continue reducing policy rates, cutting a total of 100 basis points in four consecutive 
steps to bring the main policy rate to 2.00% by June.

Each decision was guided by the Governing Council’s reaction function, based on 
three elements: the assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying 
inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. In making its decisions, 
the Governing Council pursued a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting 
approach, without pre-committing to a particular rate path.

The euro area economy, meanwhile, showed surprising resilience to a challenging 
global environment.

This was partly due to frontloading, as firms rushed to get ahead of the new trade 
barriers in the early months of the year, giving European manufacturing a temporary 
lift. That boost faded as tariffs took hold and as manufacturing weakened in the face 
of competitiveness challenges.

But more fundamentally, the euro area economy was sustained by a genuine 
strengthening of domestic demand, which more than offset the external shock. 
Domestic demand fully accounted for growth in 2025.

Perhaps the most encouraging development was in investment.

Business investment expanded at a robust pace, driven by intangible areas – 
artificial intelligence, software and digitalisation – as Europe’s firms embraced digital 
technology with new urgency. And towards the end of the year, higher German 
defence spending began to take effect, itself a response to the new geopolitical 
environment.

Euro area growth reached 1.4% in 2025 – almost one-third stronger than projected 
at the start of the year, and a testament to the economy’s resilience.

Altogether, this allowed the Governing Council to put rates on hold from July 
onwards. With inflation around our medium-term target, longer-term inflation 
expectations well anchored and a broadly neutral monetary policy stance, the 
Governing Council was in a good place and well positioned to respond to future 
shocks in either direction.

In 2025 the Governing Council also formalised how it would interpret and react to 
future shocks, through its monetary policy strategy assessment – a collaborative 
Eurosystem effort completed in June. Narrower in scope than the 2021 review, it 
incorporated lessons from the shift in the inflation environment and the policy 
response that followed.

The assessment reaffirmed the symmetric 2% inflation target over the medium term 
as the cornerstone of the ECB’s strategy. And it extended that symmetry to the 
reaction function: large, sustained deviations from the target in either direction would 
be tackled with appropriately forceful or persistent action. The Governing Council 
also underlined the importance of taking into account not only the most likely path for 
inflation and growth, but also the surrounding risks and uncertainty, including through 
scenario and sensitivity analyses.

Beyond monetary policy, the ECB made progress across a range of other areas in 
2025.

There were notable developments in market infrastructure and payments, too.

with the aim of being ready for a possible pilot exercise in 2027 and a potential 
rollout in 2029.

Work on the redesign of euro banknotes continued in parallel, reflecting the ECB’s 
commitment to maintaining cash alongside digital money. The Governing Council 
selected motifs illustrating two possible themes for the next series of banknotes – 
“European culture: shared cultural spaces” and “Rivers and birds: resilience in 
diversity” – and launched a design contest for the new banknotes in July.

The quality of the ECB’s research continued to earn wide international recognition, a 
reflection of the excellence of our researchers. The ECB now ranks first in the world 
in the field of monetary economics according to Research Papers in Economics – a 
widely used index of economics research.

At the end of the year, the euro area stood ready to welcome Bulgaria as its 21st 
member, reaffirming the euro’s attractiveness at a time of growing geopolitical 
uncertainty. And support for the euro among euro area citizens reached a record 
83% in the spring and remained strong throughout the year.

None of the above would have been possible without the dedication and expertise of 
ECB staff. This Annual Report provides a detailed account of their work in 2025.

Services remained more resilient than industry, amid high 
uncertainty in the global environment.

The ECB lowered its key interest rates by 100 basis points in the 
first half of 2025, bringing the deposit facility rate to 2.00% by 
June, amid continuing signs that inflation was moving sustainably 
towards the 2% target.

In the third quarter of 2025, the aggregate Common Equity Tier 1 
ratio stood at 16.1%. This demonstrates the strong resilience of 
the euro area banking sector, which was also bolstered by robust 
profitability and a non-performing loans ratio that stood close to 
historical lows.

The Instant Payments Regulation, which requires payment 
service providers in the euro area to be able to receive and send 
instant payments, led to a substantial rise in euro-denominated 
activity in TARGET Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS). The daily 
average number of transactions grew from 1,657,421 payments 
in December 2024 to 3,845,376 in December 2025.

In the European Commission’s spring 2025 Standard 
Eurobarometer survey, 83% of people in the euro area came out 
in favour of the statement “A European economic and monetary 
union with one single currency, the euro”. This showed that 
support for our single currency, the euro, is at an all-time high.

As part of its strategy to support the green transition, the ECB 
continued to increase the share of green investments in its own 
funds, from 1% in 2019 to 33% at the end of 2025.

Global economic activity remained resilient in 2025 despite heightened trade-related 
headwinds. The effects of a marked shift in US trade policy on global growth were 
mitigated by supportive policies, strong investment related to artificial intelligence 
(AI) and frontloading of imports. Global trade expanded as imports were brought 
forward in anticipation of higher tariffs, but momentum weakened later in the year as 
these effects unwound and the impact of higher tariffs materialised. Global inflation 
continued to ease, albeit at a slower pace and with a less synchronised pattern than 
in previous years. The euro appreciated in nominal effective terms and, more 
markedly, against the US dollar. The euro area economy displayed a moderate but 
broad-based recovery in 2025, during which labour productivity growth turned 
positive while employment growth weakened somewhat. Growth dynamics were 
supported by less restrictive monetary policy, but the economy faced challenges 
relating to uncertainty about trade tariffs and the geopolitical situation. While industry 
showed some volatility, services remained more stable, keeping a floor under 
growth. Headline inflation in the euro area continued to move towards the ECB’s 2% 
medium-term target in 2025, driven by the past monetary policy tightening, receding 
pipeline pressures from energy and non-energy commodity prices as well as low 
import price pressures more generally. Most indicators of underlying inflation showed 
a gradual further moderation in the course of 2025, supporting the development of 
headline inflation towards rates close to the target. In this economic environment, 
and on the back of the less restrictive monetary policy and an increase in real long-
term interest rates, euro area yield curves steepened and stock prices increased 
significantly. Financing conditions for euro area firms and households continued to 
ease early in the year before broadly stabilising. However, the recovery in bank 
lending remained weak and broad money growth was sluggish.

The global economy proved resilient in 2025 and continued to expand at a moderate 
pace, broadly unchanged from 2024 at 3.4%. The year was marked by a major shift 
in economic policy priorities in the United States that saw US tariffs increase to their 
highest level in nearly a century. While the overall impact on the global economy was 
cushioned by the limited response from trading partners, uncertainty surrounding 
future trade arrangements remained high (Chart 1.1), clouding trade prospects. 
Despite these headwinds, several countervailing factors supported global activity. 
Strong investment linked to advances in AI boosted trade in technology-related 
products and contributed to equity market gains in some economies, particularly the 
United States. Furthermore, firms and households accelerated purchases of foreign 
goods in anticipation of possible tariff increases, supporting – at least temporarily –

manufacturing output and exports, including in China. A generally supportive policy 
mix in major economies – especially on the fiscal side – further softened the drag 
from trade tensions. Nevertheless, global growth momentum weakened towards the 
end of the year as the temporary positive factors faded, while trade barriers and 
uncertainty continued to weigh on confidence and investment, albeit to a lesser 
extent than in the first half of the year.

Global trade grew robustly in 2025, increasing by 4.7%. This reflected strong import 
growth in the first half of the year, when households and firms advanced both 
consumption and investment decisions in anticipation of higher tariffs. Moreover, 
trade patterns adjusted to the new tariff landscape, with some flows redirected to 
other countries. Trade, especially exports from Asian countries, was also supported 
by high demand for goods that enable the deployment of AI, amid strong investment 
in information and communication technology equipment in the United States and 
other advanced economies. In the second half of the year, trade growth slowed 
markedly, as the earlier frontloading dissipated and the effects of higher tariffs 
materialised.

Global trade expanded as imports 
were brought forward, but 
momentum faded later in the year

Global inflation continued to ease in 2025, though with a less synchronised pattern 
than in the previous year. Headline consumer price inflation (CPI) fell to 2.2% in 
December 2025, from 3.0% in December 2024 (Chart 1.2). The deceleration was 
moderated by a renewed increase in goods inflation, while services inflation

remained persistent in many economies. Inflation developments varied across 
countries. In the United States, headline inflation remained above target, with tariff 
increases leading to a significant acceleration in goods inflation. In the United 
Kingdom, inflation was higher at the end of 2025 than at the end of the previous year 
amid higher administered and food prices as well as the fading impact of past 
declines in energy prices. In China, by contrast, inflation remained subdued, 
reflecting weak domestic demand linked to the prolonged downturn in the real-estate 
sector and persistent industrial overcapacity.

Energy prices were lower at the end of 2025 than a year earlier, reflecting declines in 
both oil and European gas prices (Chart 1.3). Brent oil prices dropped by 19%, 
driven by a combination of demand and supply factors. On the demand side, global 
economic activity weakened following the tariff disputes that began in April. On the 
supply side, successive OPEC+ production increases pushed the market into a 
significant surplus by year-end. Prices nonetheless experienced some volatility in 
June amid heightened tensions in the Middle East, particularly following the Israeli 
and US strikes on Iran, but the brief upward spike subsided after the announcement 
of the US-brokered ceasefire in Gaza. European gas prices declined by 42% in the 
year-end comparison, remaining far below their 2022 peak. Gas prices initially rose 
early in the year owing to the expiry of the transit agreement between Russia and 
Ukraine and concerns about European gas storage adequacy for the 2025-26 winter. 
They subsequently moved downward, driven by relatively weak European 
consumption, subdued Asian liquified natural gas demand, and, later in the year, 
renewed prospects of an end to Russia’s war against Ukraine.

Energy commodity prices showed a 
downward trend due to a 
combination of demand and supply 
factors

The euro appreciated in nominal effective terms by 6.8% and against the US dollar 
by 13.1% compared with end-2024. Most of the appreciation against the dollar 
occurred in the first half of the year. This shift was driven by heightened uncertainty 
over US tariff policies, which weighed on the dollar and triggered an acceleration of 
capital flows into euro area assets, as well as by adjustments in hedging behaviour 
and more resilience than expected in the euro area economy. In subsequent months, 
the euro traded within a relatively narrow range, as downward and upward pressures 
broadly offset each other. Market expectations about how much the Federal Reserve 
System would cut its policy rate fluctuated repeatedly as new economic data came 
out. Tariff-related upward pressure on inflation tended to support the US dollar by 
reducing expectations of interest rate cuts, while signs of a slowing labour market 
had the opposite effect. In addition, regulatory and institutional uncertainty, along 
with concerns surrounding the US federal government shutdown likely weighed on 
the dollar. Beyond its substantial appreciation against the US dollar, the euro also

The euro appreciated in nominal 
effective terms and, more markedly, 
against the US dollar compared 
with end-2024

1.2 
Economic activity held up despite high global uncertainty

Euro area real GDP growth rose to 1.4% in 2025 from 0.9% in 2024 (Chart 1.4). The 
ECB’s gradual shift from a restrictive to a more neutral monetary policy stance, the 
anticipation of a looser fiscal stance and easing inflation played an important role in 
supporting the moderate but broad-based recovery. The economic landscape was 
also strongly influenced by geopolitical tensions and high uncertainty relating to trade 
tariffs – especially those of the United States – as well as the volatile geopolitical 
situation in parts of the world affecting confidence and production chains. The slight 
recovery in the manufacturing sector and a steadier services sector were key to 
understanding why the euro area economy remained relatively resilient in 2025 
despite the challenging environment.

Economic activity remained resilient 
in the face of global challenges, 
especially in international trade

Real gross value added in industry expanded by 2.2% in 2025, after contracting by 
0.5% in 2024. The rebound originated mainly from the first quarter, reflecting the 
temporary boost in production to accommodate the frontloading of exports in 
anticipation of the higher tariffs subsequently imposed by the new US Administration. 
However, growth dynamics softened considerably for the remainder of the year, 
reflecting higher tariffs, increasing global competition, persistently elevated energy

A strong first quarter, reflecting 
frontloading of exports, was 
followed by softening growth

costs and high, albeit gradually declining, economic policy uncertainty. While the key 
ECB interest rates had remained high through most of 2024, clearer signals of 
forthcoming easing in early 2025 reduced uncertainty and improved credit conditions 
for firms. This helped investment to recover, especially in manufacturing sectors that 
had been constrained by high financing costs. Real gross value added in services 
grew by 1.2% in 2025, slowing from 1.5% in 2024 but nonetheless keeping a floor 
under euro area growth. The deceleration in services growth stemmed partly from 
caution on the part of households, reflected in high household savings, amid 
persistent geopolitical risks and high economic uncertainty. At the same time, digital 
and IT services remained relatively resilient – benefiting from continued corporate 
investment in automation, cybersecurity and AI integration.

Private consumption accelerated slightly in 2025, rising by 1.5% compared with the 
previous year. Consumption of goods grew more strongly at the start of the year, 
while spending on services gained more momentum starting with the second quarter, 
although it slowed in the third quarter. Overall, consumption of goods expanded by 
more than that of services (Chart 1.5). The growth of real disposable income 
supported household expenditure, as nominal wage growth remained robust, 
inflation continued to decline and employment growth was resilient, albeit somewhat 
weaker than in the previous year. However, private consumption continued to lag 
behind the developments in real disposable income, as the saving rate remained 
elevated amid heightened geopolitical risks and economic uncertainty.

Private consumption accelerated, 
driven by goods

After falling sharply in 2024, reflecting weak demand and the lagged impact of tighter 
financing conditions, housing investment began to recover in 2025. This largely 
reflected improvements in financing conditions and the continued increase in 
household real incomes, both of which improved affordability and helped stabilise 
housing demand over the course of the year. Even so, housing investment remained 
weaker than private consumption and non-construction investment, underscoring the 
early stage of its recovery.

Non-construction investment (a standard national accounts proxy for business 
investment which excludes construction from total investment, in the absence of 
available statistics on private and public investment) grew robustly in 2025, driven by 
rising demand and by easing financing conditions as the ECB continued to lower its

Business investment was supported 
by rising demand and easing 
financing conditions, despite 
headwinds

key interest rates in the first half of the year. It increased by 4.4% overall in 2025 
compared with 2024, amid considerable quarterly volatility throughout the year. 
Excluding volatile intangibles in Ireland – which are influenced to a considerable 
extent by the activities of multinational firms – business investment rose by 2.2% in 
2025 (see Chart 1.5). This outcome reflects the continued divergence between 
tangible and intangible investment dynamics observed in recent years. Investment in 
tangibles, such as machinery, equipment and transport, was dampened by higher 
tariffs and elevated uncertainty. Conversely, intangible investment grew strongly, 
driven by advancements in digitalisation, particularly in the areas of AI and software 
development. Additionally, a recovery in profit growth and spillover effects from the 
Next Generation EU (NGEU) programme supported investment in 2025, helping to 
offset the adverse effects of competitiveness losses. Burdensome regulation is also 
reported by firms to have held back investment last year.

Trade developments in 2025 were marked by pronounced volatility and structural 
challenges for the euro area. Euro area exports surged in the first quarter, driven by 
frontloading ahead of anticipated higher US tariffs and largely reflecting a spike in 
pharmaceutical shipments, particularly from Ireland. However, this momentum was 
temporary. In the second quarter, exports contracted amid higher US tariffs, a strong 
euro and subdued global demand, with pharmaceutical exports showing sharp 
fluctuations. Exports picked up in the third quarter as a result of higher 
pharmaceutical sales to the United States, but underlying momentum remained 
weak. The US-EU trade agreement in July, which capped US tariffs on EU goods at 
15%, helped to alleviate the still elevated policy uncertainty (Chart 1.1). However, 
forward-looking indicators suggested continued weakness in manufacturing export 
orders. Imports showed moderate growth in 2025, buoyed by rising volumes from 
China, partly reflecting trade diversion as a result of tensions between China and the 
United States, and the stronger euro, which lowered the cost of imports. Euro area 
import prices also remained under downward pressure as energy commodity price 
pressures continued to recede. The influx of competitively priced Chinese goods in 
the context of persistent Chinese manufacturing overcapacity intensified competition 
for domestic producers, while Chinese export restrictions on critical inputs, such as 
rare earths, highlighted vulnerabilities in euro area supply chains.

Euro area exports remained 
subdued amid rising tariffs, high 
tariff level uncertainty and a 
stronger euro

After a period of labour hoarding, employment growth slowed in 2025 relative to 
recent years and survey indicators suggested that the euro area labour market 
continued to cool over the course of the year (Chart 1.6). The unemployment rate 
moved between 6.3% and 6.4%, and was 6.3% in December – one of the lowest 
points recorded since the introduction of the euro and 1.2 percentage points below 
the pre-pandemic level in January 2020. Total employment and total hours worked 
increased in 2025 by about 0.7% and 0.6% respectively, i.e. at a lower rate than real 
GDP, which grew by 1.5%. These developments led to a recovery in labour 
productivity growth. Stronger labour productivity growth underlined a reduction in 
labour hoarding, i.e. companies holding on to more workers than demanded by 
short-term needs of production. This is also indicated by the job vacancy rate

The euro area labour market 
weakened, while labour productivity 
recovered

receding further from its peak in the second quarter of 2022 to a level of 2.2% in the 
fourth quarter of 2025, below its pre-pandemic level of 2.3%. Average hours worked 
moved downwards in 2025, amid significant volatility and differences between 
countries.3 The labour force participation rate in the age group 15-74 years 
increased to 66.2% in the fourth quarter of 2025, which is 1.6 percentage points 
above its pre-pandemic level. Women, older workers, persons with higher education 
and foreign workers contributed most to this increase in the labour force.

1.3 
Need for prioritisation in public spending at times of 
limited fiscal space

The euro area general government deficit is expected to have decreased marginally 
to 3.0% of GDP in 2025 (Chart 1.7), from 3.1% in 2024 and 3.5% in 2023. The 
significant fiscal tightening in 2024 resulted from the phasing-out of the remaining 
government measures that had been introduced to compensate households and 
firms for high energy prices and inflation. By contrast, the only moderate fiscal 
tightening projected for 2025 results from higher taxes and social security 
contributions which are not fully matched by higher growth in primary public 
spending (including items funded by the NGEU programme) and rising interest 
payments.

Only a moderate fiscal tightening 
projected for 2025

The euro area debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to have increased to 87.3% of GDP in 
2025, from its already elevated level of 86.6% of GDP in 2024. It remains well above 
its pre-pandemic level of 83.6% in 2019 (Chart 1.8). The projected rise in the debt 
ratio in 2025 is the result of the aggregate primary deficit and positive deficit-debt 
adjustments, which are only partly offset by a favourable, but shrinking, interest rate-
growth differential.

Strategic spending needs, including for defence, infrastructure, and the digital and 
green transitions – together with population ageing – are putting upward pressure on

Strategic spending needs are 
putting upward pressure on public 
debt

public debt.4 For defence spending in particular, some of the euro area countries 
with lower levels of debt have made use of their fiscal space, leading to higher debt 
ratios than before Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022. More generally, the revised EU 
fiscal governance framework, adopted in April 2024, provides some budgetary 
flexibility to accommodate part of the spending pressures. In fact, several countries 
have made use, under their medium-term fiscal-structural plans, of the opportunity to 
extend the consolidation period from four to seven years in exchange for structural 
reforms and investment, thereby reducing their annual fiscal adjustment burden. 
Moreover, the national escape clause, activated for 11 euro area countries, offers 
temporary flexibility to deviate from the country’s net expenditure path as a result of 
higher defence spending, provided that such deviation does not endanger fiscal 
sustainability over the medium term.5 As the budgetary flexibility will not cover the 
additional spending in full, complementary routes need to be followed, including 
spending efficiency and reprioritisation of national budgets.

On 25 November 2025 the European Commission adopted the 2026 European 
Semester Autumn Package, setting out economic policy priorities.6 The package 
contains the Commission’s assessment of Member States’ compliance with the EU 
fiscal governance framework and provides guidance for their fiscal policies in 2026. 
Implementing the revised governance framework fully, transparently and without 
delay will help governments bring down budget deficits and debt ratios on a 
sustained basis. Of the 17 euro area countries that had submitted their draft 
budgetary plans for 2026, the European Commission assessed 12 countries to be 
compliant with the EU fiscal framework.7 For five countries, the plans were assessed 
to be at risk of non-compliance, with two countries showing risks of material non-
compliance. Moreover, for the six euro area countries in excessive deficit procedure, 
i.e. Belgium, France, Italy, Malta, Austria and Slovakia, the European Commission 
will assess the situation in spring 2026 on the basis of fiscal outturn data for 2025. 
The European Commission also suggested in November that an excessive deficit 
procedure be opened for Finland.

1.4 
Inflation moved towards the 2% medium-term target over 
the course of the year

7 Not all euro area countries have submitted their budgetary plans to the European Commission, mainly 
owing to their electoral cycles. Spain has yet to submit a plan. Belgium submitted a plan at the 
beginning of 2026 only. Austria submitted a plan covering 2025 and 2026 in May 2025, and the 
Commission assessed that it was in line with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact.

ECB’s past monetary policy tightening, easing wage pressures, receding pipeline 
pressures from energy and non-energy commodity prices, as well as low import price 
pressures more generally – in part due to the appreciation of the euro – supported 
continued disinflation. HICP inflation excluding energy and food (HICPX) made the 
largest contribution to the decline in headline inflation in 2025. It decreased gradually 
throughout the year, stabilising between 2.3% and 2.4% in the later months. This 
was largely due to easing, yet still elevated, services inflation, reflecting in particular 
decreasing wage pressures. Non-energy industrial goods inflation, by contrast, 
remained broadly stable around its longer-term pre-pandemic average throughout 
most of 2025 and declined more visibly only in the last months of the year given low 
import price pressures. Headline inflation was also dampened by subdued energy 
inflation, due to declines in energy commodity prices and the appreciation of the 
euro. Food inflation, by contrast, was on an upward path in the first part of 2025 and 
peaked in July, driven mainly by unprocessed food price increases stemming from 
adverse weather and supply-side shortages. It moderated to 2.5% at year-end. 
Processed food inflation also contributed to the pressures, reflecting the continued 
pass-through of earlier commodity price increases, particularly for cocoa and coffee.8

Energy inflation decreased in the beginning of 2025 and was negative from March 
onwards, driven primarily by declines in oil and wholesale gas prices in US dollars as 
well as the appreciation of the euro. However, the annual rate of change in 
consumer energy prices also displayed some volatility, largely driven by upward 
base effects, particularly in the transport fuel component. Food inflation showed a 
hump-shaped development over 2025, driven primarily by unprocessed food prices.

In the first eight months of the year, unprocessed food inflation followed an upward 
trend, pushed up by increases in fruit and vegetable prices related to adverse 
weather conditions, as well as by steadily increasing meat prices amid supply 
shortages linked partly to animal diseases. From September onwards it began to 
ease as the weather effect on fruit and vegetable prices faded, but rebounded 
somewhat at the end of the year. Processed food inflation remained relatively stable 
for most of 2025, declining clearly only in the last quarter as pipeline pressures from 
food commodity prices such as coffee and cocoa receded. Overall, food inflation 
remained elevated during the year. This reflected the continued, albeit weakening, 
pass-through of earlier increases in food commodity prices, supply-demand 
imbalances in some segments, and still elevated price pressures from factors 
including wages.

Underlying inflation indicators, which are aimed at capturing the persistent or 
common component of inflation, supported the development of headline inflation 
towards rates close to the target. For instance, core inflation, as measured by the 
HICPX, displayed little volatility and edged down from 2.7% in December 2024 to 
rates between 2.3% and 2.4% in most months from March onwards. The disinflation 
in core inflation was driven mainly by services items. Services inflation declined from 
4.0% in December 2024 to 3.4% in December 2025, reflecting the gradual easing of 
earlier drivers, notably wage pressures and annual repricing effects.9 Services 
inflation displayed some short-term volatility in April, when the timing of Easter 
temporarily lifted prices for some items, but fluctuated within a relatively narrow 
range for the remainder of the year.10 Non-energy industrial goods inflation 
remained relatively unchanged throughout 2025, hovering quite closely around its 
pre-pandemic average of 0.6% (measured over 1999 to 2019). It edged up 
somewhat in the third quarter, yet by October had returned to its pre-pandemic 
average. Towards the end of the year it fell somewhat below that average, given low 
import price pressures and the appreciation of the euro. Other underlying inflation 
indicators also declined gradually in the course of 2025, or remained broadly 
stable.11

Domestic cost pressures in the euro area, as measured by growth of the GDP 
deflator, fell to 2.4% in 2025 from 3.0% in 2024 (Chart 1.10). The decline stemmed 
from a decrease in the contributions of unit taxes and unit labour costs, the latter 
related to moderating compensation per employee growth and strengthening labour 
productivity growth. These declines were in part offset by a gradual strengthening in 
the contribution of unit profits in line with cyclical developments. Within 
compensation per employee growth, which was broadly stable throughout the year

Domestic cost pressures fell further, 
reflecting easing labour cost 
pressures, partly offset by gradually 
strengthening unit profits

and averaged 3.9%, negotiated wage growth and the wage drift were volatile.12 
Negotiated wage growth eased substantially over the course of the year, averaging 
2.8% after 4.5% in 2024. This reflected the normalisation of wage demands following 
a period where workers had gradually recuperated purchasing power lost during the 
surge in inflation in 2022.13 Developments in the wage drift, partly related to 
statistical effects stemming from one-off payments in 2024, pushed up overall wage 
growth. Unit profits recovered somewhat in the course of 2025 and realigned more 
closely with the business cycle, but continued to buffer labour costs, albeit to a lesser 
degree than in 2024.

Longer-term inflation expectations remained broadly aligned with the ECB’s 2% 
medium-term target throughout 2025, supporting a sustainable return of inflation to 
target. In the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters, as well as in the ECB Survey 
of Monetary Analysts, longer-term inflation expectations were firmly anchored at 2% 
in 2025 (Chart 1.11). Other survey indicators, such as Consensus Economics, also 
reported stable longer-term inflation expectations at around 2%. Market-based 
measures of longer-term inflation compensation, such as the five-year forward 
inflation-linked swap (ILS) rate five years ahead, stayed close to 2%, with limited 
variation during the year. A slight increase in the ILS rate was observed in March, 
driven by fiscal expansion plans in Europe, though this was partially offset by the 
repercussions of trade tensions shortly after. Further temporary increases were seen 
in June, reflecting developments in energy prices, but the ILS rate ultimately 
stabilised at 2.1% after the summer for the remainder of the year. These movements

Longer-term inflation expectations 
remained well anchored at around 
the ECB’s 2% target

mainly reflected higher inflation risk premia, while model-based estimates of genuine 
longer-term inflation expectations – excluding risk premia – remained steady 
between 1.9% and 2%. On the consumer side, median inflation expectations for 
three years ahead hovered between 2.4% and 2.5% throughout the year, ticking up 
to 2.6% in December. This persistence at a slightly heightened level likely reflected 
still elevated uncertainty. Evidence from the ECB Consumer Expectations Survey 
shows that food prices strongly influenced inflation perceptions and one-year 
expectations, while their impact on longer-term expectations was more limited.

Sources: LSEG, ECB (Consumer Expectations Survey (CES), Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), Survey of Monetary Analysts 
(SMA)) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: The five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead (5y5y ILS rate) reports observed data at monthly frequency. 
The expectation component of the 5y5y ILS rate is obtained as the average estimate from two affine term structure models as in 
Joslin, Singleton and Zhu (2011)14 applied to ILS rates which are not adjusted for the indexation lag; see Burban, V. et al., 
“Decomposing market-based measures of inflation compensation into inflation expectations and risk premia”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 
8, 2021. The SPF for the fourth quarter of 2025 was conducted between 1 and 7 October 2025. In the SPF rounds for the third and 
fourth quarters of 2025, longer-term expectations referred to 2030; in the rounds for the first and second quarters, they referred to 
2029. The latest observation for the CES and for the SMA is for December 2025.

1.5 
Credit recovery remained weak, despite a further easing 
in financing conditions

A decline in short-term interest rates, combined with a significant increase in long-
term rates, led to a steepening of the euro area risk-free yield curve in 2025. The 
reduction in short-term rates, which occurred predominantly during the first half of 
the year, reflected the policy rate cuts implemented by the ECB up to June as 
inflation was on track to move sustainably towards the 2% medium-term target (see 
Section 2.1). At longer maturities, the ten-year overnight index swap (OIS) rate 
averaged 2.8% in December 2025 (Chart 1.12), marking an increase of 
approximately 60 basis points compared with the average recorded in December 
2024. Long-term rates experienced some sharp and volatile movements during the 
first four months of the year, on the back of defence and infrastructure spending

Euro area yield curves steepened, 
largely driven by higher long-term 
real rates

14 Joslin, S., Singleton, K.J. and Zhu, H., “A New Perspective on Gaussian Dynamic Term Structure 
Models”, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 24, Issue 3, 2011, pp. 926-970.

plans in European countries as well as heightened uncertainty surrounding US tariffs 
and trade policies. From the end of April the ten-year OIS rate gradually increased 
by around 30 basis points in the remaining part of the year, primarily reflecting an 
increase in the real rate component on the back of a more resilient economy. 
Importantly, the steepening of the euro area risk-free curve reflects a strong global 
component, as similar repricing occurred across other major advanced economies. 
Mirroring developments in the OIS rate, the ten-year GDP-weighted euro area 
sovereign bond yield rose over the course of the year. It reached 3.2% in December, 
approximately 50 basis points higher than its level a year earlier. Ten-year 
government bond yields across euro area countries ended 2025 at higher levels than 
at the start of the year, with a narrowing of spreads relative to the OIS rate. The 
announcement of defence spending plans in some euro area countries (see Section 
1.3) was a pivotal moment in the market reappraisal, triggering a sharp increase of 
approximately 40 basis points in the ten-year German Bund yield, with other euro 
area sovereign yields experiencing similar upward pressure. Euro area sovereign 
yields subsequently fell somewhat, although most ended the year at higher levels. 
The exception was the ten-year sovereign yield for Italy, which was broadly 
unchanged from its level at the end of 2024, supported by ongoing consolidation of 
Italy’s fiscal position. Conversely, political uncertainty in France raised concerns 
among market participants about potential delays in fiscal consolidation, leading to 
upward pressures on French sovereign yields. These developments resulted in a 
convergence of Italian and French bond yields toward similar levels, while yield 
dispersion in the euro area reached historically low levels.

Chart 1.12 
Long-term interest rates and the cost of borrowing for firms and for households for 
house purchase

Sources: Bloomberg, LSEG and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Monthly observations. The euro area ten-year government bond yield is a GDP-weighted average. The indicators for the cost of 
borrowing are calculated by aggregating short-term and long-term bank lending rates using a 24-month moving average of new 
business volumes. The latest observations are for December 2025.

In 2025 stock prices – as measured by the EURO STOXX index – rose by about 
21%. Strong earnings expectations, higher dividends and lower equity risk premia 
drove the increase in equity prices despite the dampening impact of rising long-term

Equity markets were primarily 
supported by strong earnings 
expectations

risk-free rates. Equity prices increased in both the non-financial and the financial 
sector, with the latter seeing more pronounced gains. Within the financial sector, 
banking stocks led the gains, supported by improved profitability stemming from 
banks’ trading activity, the provision of credit and the steepening of the yield curve. 
By the end of 2025 the broad indices of euro area non-financial corporation and bank 
equity prices were around 12% and 80% higher, respectively, than their levels at the 
end of 2024. Corporate bond spreads generally narrowed, with the notable exception 
of bonds issued in the high-yield segment of the financial sector and despite the sell-
off in the corporate bond market following the US tariff announcement on 2 April. 
After that, corporate bond spreads declined significantly, owing to renewed risk 
appetite and a more resilient economy.

Financing conditions for firms in the euro area continued to ease in the first part of 
the year, before broadly stabilising, in line with bank funding cost dynamics. The 
decline in banks’ composite cost of debt financing early in the year reflected the 
pass-through of policy rate cuts, while the subsequent stabilisation was driven by 
market interest rate dynamics and reduced expectations of further rate cuts. The 
reduction in the nominal cost of borrowing for firms from the peak levels in 2023 
reflects in part banks’ prudent lending behaviour since the start of the monetary 
policy easing cycle, which has been associated with a reallocation of lending towards 
lower-risk borrowers, which receive more favourable loan pricing. For households, 
the decline in borrowing costs in 2025 was more limited, the rates on new mortgages 
largely reflecting the increase in long-term market interest rates. The composite bank 
lending rate for non-financial corporations stood at 3.6% in December, about 80 
basis points below its level at the end of 2024, while the corresponding rate for 
households for house purchase declined by about 10 basis points, to 3.3% (Chart 
1.12). As a result, the spread between lending rates for firms and households, which 
had widened during the monetary policy tightening phase, narrowed significantly. 
Cross-country dispersion in corporate lending rates also moderated, while dispersion 
in household lending rates continued to be influenced by differences in loan maturity 
structures across countries.

Financing conditions generally 
continued to ease early in the year, 
before broadly stabilising

Bank lending continued to recover alongside the monetary policy easing, albeit more 
gradually than suggested by historical patterns (Chart 1.13). Lending to firms 
stabilised in the second half of 2025, with growth rates remaining well below their 
historical average given that aggregate demand was subdued and banks risk-averse 
despite their strong capital positions, limited deterioration in asset quality and still 
strong profitability. According to the euro area bank lending survey, banks’ credit 
standards (i.e. internal guidelines or loan approval criteria) for firms tightened in the 
first and last two quarters of 2025. Smaller and riskier firms experienced a 
particularly marked deterioration in loan availability, as reported in the survey on the 
access to finance of enterprises. The annual growth rate of bank loans to firms stood 
at 3.0% in December, compared with 4.3% on average between January 1999 and 
December 2025. Growth in total credit, including financing from non-bank financial 
intermediaries, remained contained, also as a result of high economic policy

Bank lending to firms and 
households recovered more 
gradually than in the past

uncertainty, as shown in an ECB Blog post published in October.15 Higher valuations 
of listed shares contributed to the net increase in external financing for firms (Chart 
1.14). Lending to households continued to recover, with an annual growth rate of 
3.0% in December (also well below its long-term average of 4.2%), mostly driven by 
mortgages. This development is in line with solid housing loan demand reported in 
the bank lending survey, as well as the sustained house purchase intentions 
reported in the Consumer Expectations Survey. At the same time, the share of 
households reporting a deterioration in access to credit in the latter survey increased 
relative to those reporting improvements. The share was larger for lower-income 
households. Consumer credit, to which lower-income households had sustained 
recourse in 2025, was subject to tighter lending standards throughout the year, 
according to the bank lending survey.

After plateauing at nearly 4% earlier in the year, annual broad money (M3) growth 
moderated towards the end of 2025, supported by stable dynamics in loans and 
deposits of households and firms (Chart 1.13). Annual M3 growth was 2.8% in 
December, compared with 3.4% in December 2024. The moderation largely reflected 
the continued liquidity drain resulting from the contraction in the Eurosystem asset 
portfolios and a reduction in net foreign inflows, which appear to have lost vigour and 
become more volatile compared with 2024, while banks’ purchases of government 
bonds supported money growth in an environment of robust bond supply.

Annual broad money growth 
moderated over 2025

Chart 1.13 
M3 growth and the growth of credit to firms and households

Source: ECB. 
Notes: Firms are non-financial corporations. The latest observations are for December 2025.

15 See Allayioti, A., Bozzelli, G., Di Casola, P., Mendicino, C., Skoblar, A. and Velasco, S. “More 
uncertainty, less lending: how US policy affects firm financing in Europe”, The ECB Blog, ECB, 2 
October 2025.

Chart 1.14 
Net flows of external financing to firms

Sources: ECB and Eurostat. 
Notes: Firms are non-financial corporations. MFI: monetary financial institution. In “loans from non-MFIs and the rest of the world”, 
non-monetary financial institutions consist of other financial intermediaries, pension funds and insurance corporations. “MFI loans” and 
“loans from non-MFIs and the rest of the world” are corrected for loan sales and securitisation. “Other” is the difference between the 
total and the instruments included in the chart and consists mostly of inter-company loans and trade credit. The latest observations are 
for the third quarter of 2025. The annual flow for 2025 is computed as a four-quarter sum of flows from the fourth quarter of 2024 to the 
third quarter of 2025. The quarterly euro area sector accounts are subject to major revisions every five years; the most recent one took 
place in 2024, which explains why the data in some years differ significantly from those used in the 2023 and previous Annual Reports.

Box 1 
 
Bulgaria becomes the 21st euro area country

On 1 January 2026 Bulgaria adopted the euro and became the 21st member of the euro area. 
The positive assessments set out in the European Commission Convergence Report and the ECB 
Convergence Report paved the way for the country’s adoption of the euro, which was approved by 
the Council of the European Union in July 2025. Bulgaria’s accession marks a further enlargement 
of the euro area after Croatia joined in 2023 and highlights the fact that euro area membership 
continues to be an attractive and credible policy anchor, including in an environment of heightened 
uncertainty and geopolitical tensions.16

Bulgaria’s adoption of the euro represents a major milestone in its broader process of 
European integration. The country’s journey towards membership of the euro area underscores its 
commitment to deepening economic and institutional ties with its fellow members of the European 
Union. From the time of its accession to the EU in 2007 Bulgaria made significant progress towards 
meeting the requirements for adopting the single currency, as set out in the Maastricht criteria. This 
path was supported by wide-ranging structural reforms and political commitment to aligning 
domestic policies with euro area economic and monetary standards. Macroeconomic imbalances 
that existed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic were gradually corrected through credible policy 
actions and prudent fiscal policies. In this time Bulgaria also achieved significant real convergence 
with the euro area economy, with GDP per capita increasing from around 35% of the euro area 
average in 2006 to just above 60% in 2025.

16 See Falagiarda, M. and Gartner, C., “Croatia adopts the euro”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2022.

Bulgaria’s path to euro adoption was underpinned by a clearly defined and closely 
monitored set of preparatory steps (Figure A). In 2018 Bulgaria expressed its firm intention to 
join the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II), an essential step in the process towards adopting the 
euro.17 A roadmap was agreed between the Bulgarian authorities and the ERM II parties, including 
a comprehensive set of policy measures to be completed prior to entry. These prior commitments 
were designed to address key structural challenges and to support compliance with the EU’s 
convergence criteria. In 2020 Bulgaria formally requested to join ERM II. The Bulgarian lev entered 
ERM II in July 2020 alongside Croatia’s kuna, and the Bulgarian government committed at the 
same time to a set of post-entry measures focusing on strengthening the country’s anti-money-
laundering framework, enhancing supervision of its non-banking financial sector, improving 
governance of state-owned enterprises and reforming its insolvency framework. In parallel, Bulgaria 
joined the banking union through close cooperation between the ECB and Българска народна 
банка (Bulgarian National Bank) starting in October 2020, thereby aligning banking supervision with 
euro area standards and reinforcing financial stability.

The final phase of Bulgaria’s euro adoption process unfolded in 2025. In February 2025 the 
Bulgarian authorities formally requested an ad hoc convergence assessment by the European 
Commission and the ECB. The 2025 Convergence Reports, published on 4 June 2025, gave a 
positive assessment of Bulgaria’s degree of convergence. On this basis, the European Commission 
proposed that the Council of the EU allow Bulgaria to adopt the euro. On 8 July the Council formally 
approved Bulgaria’s accession to the euro area and set the irrevocable conversion rate of the 
Bulgarian lev at 1.95583 levs per euro. This rate corresponded to the central rate applied during 
Bulgaria’s participation in ERM II as well as to the fixed exchange rate applied during the long-
standing currency board arrangement, ensuring continuity and stability in the transition to the single 
currency.

Figure A 
Key milestones in Bulgaria’s path to euro adoption

the production and distribution of euro banknotes and coins, extensive public information and 
awareness campaigns, and the onboarding of Bulgarian financial institutions for euro area payment 
and settlement systems. In parallel, the Bulgarian National Bank was integrated into the 
Eurosystem’s monetary policy implementation and foreign exchange operations, as well as into 
common analytical frameworks, including macroeconomic projection exercises. Together, these 
steps ensured a smooth cash changeover and Bulgaria’s effective participation in the euro area 
from the first day of membership.

Euro adoption is expected to deliver tangible economic benefits for Bulgaria. Key likely gains 
include increased trade and foreign direct investment, supported by the elimination of currency 
conversion costs, enhanced price transparency and comparability, and stronger investor 
confidence, as well as improved access to European capital markets. The economy is also 
expected to benefit from lower borrowing costs, reflecting a lower country risk premium and well-
anchored inflation expectations. Beyond these effects, euro area membership provides an 
important dividend in terms of economic security and stability. For a small, highly integrated 
economy, participation in the euro area enhances institutional credibility, eliminates any remaining 
exchange rate risk vis-à-vis key non-euro area trading partners, and improves capacity to absorb 
external disturbances through deeper financial integration. Finally, adopting the euro enables 
Bulgaria to participate fully in euro area decision-making and to contribute directly to the shaping of 
common economic and monetary policies.

The costs and risks associated with adopting the euro are expected to be limited and largely 
one-off. The main costs stem from the practical preparations for the cash changeover and the 
possibility of unjustified price increases when prices are converted to euro. Public support for the 
euro in Bulgaria was relatively subdued prior to the changeover, reflecting concerns about possible 
price increases. This was also seen in earlier euro changeovers, when public support typically 
increased after adoption.18 To address these concerns, the Bulgarian authorities implemented a 
comprehensive set of measures, including enhanced price monitoring and inspections to deter 
abusive practices, as well as a mandatory dual display of prices over an extended period from 8 
August 2025 to 8 August 2026. According to available estimates, the impact of the changeover on 
the overall price level seems to have been limited and one-off, broadly in line with the experience of 
previous euro changeovers.19 Moreover, Bulgaria’s domestic monetary conditions were already 
closely aligned with those of the euro area before adoption of the euro, as the country had a long-
standing currency board arrangement with a fixed exchange rate to the euro. Euro adoption 
therefore does not lessen, but strengthens the country’s effective sovereignty by amplifying its voice 
in euro area decision-making.

While euro adoption offers important opportunities, further policy actions and reforms will 
be needed to fully reap its benefits. Prudent, growth-friendly fiscal policies, supported by a strong 
national fiscal framework, will be essential both to safeguard macroeconomic stability and to 
prevent the build-up of imbalances. Moreover, it will be necessary to sustain productivity growth 
through continued structural reforms to underpin real economic convergence within the euro area.

In particular, recent strong wage dynamics amid tight labour market conditions could undermine 
competitiveness if not matched by lasting productivity gains. Moreover, strengthening institutions, 
modernising infrastructure and expanding the supply of skilled labour, supported by an efficient use 
of EU funds, alongside deeper financial development and enhanced financial integrity, will be key to 
sustaining long-term growth, enhancing resilience and preventing the build-up of macroeconomic 
imbalances.

The Governing Council cut the three key ECB interest rates four times in the first half 
of 2025, continuing a process that had begun in 2024. It decided these interest rate 
cuts in light of consistent evidence that inflation was on track to move sustainably 
towards the 2% medium-term target. The three key ECB interest rates were reduced 
by 100 basis points in total, bringing the deposit facility rate to 2.00% by June. The 
Governing Council followed a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach, 
without pre-committing to a particular rate path. Less restrictive monetary policy, 
alongside a robust labour market, rising real incomes and solid private sector 
balance sheets bolstered the resilience of the euro area economy against global 
trade tensions and geopolitical uncertainties.

The Eurosystem balance sheet contracted by €0.1 trillion in 2025, reaching €6.3 
trillion by year-end and continuing the normalisation process started in 2022 (see 
Section 2.2). This reduction was driven by declines in the monetary policy portfolios, 
as the Eurosystem no longer conducted reinvestments under its asset purchase 
programmes. Although excess liquidity fell, recourse to the Eurosystem refinancing 
operations remained small, reflecting still ample liquidity conditions and the relatively 
lower cost of market funding alternatives. The pool of assets eligible as collateral for 
Eurosystem refinancing operations grew to €20.3 trillion.

In 2025 the Eurosystem enhanced its risk management framework to ensure risk-
efficient implementation of monetary policy. The changes mainly concerned 
collateral policies and were aimed at ensuring a continuing robust approach to 
assessing the credit quality of collateral assets, refining the calculation of haircuts for 
some asset classes and adapting the collateral framework to address climate 
change-related uncertainties. Several central banks of the Eurosystem, including the 
ECB, continued to incur low or negative income in 2025. The loss incurred by the 
ECB will be written off against future profits (see Section 2.3 and the ECB’s Annual 
Accounts for 2025).

The Governing Council’s interest rate decisions were based on its assessment of the 
inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and 
financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of 
monetary policy transmission. This comprehensive assessment led the Governing 
Council to expect that inflation would move towards the 2% target in the medium 
term in a sustained manner. The Governing Council therefore continued lowering 
interest rates, a process which it had started in 2024. Between January and June the 
three key ECB interest rates were cut at each monetary policy meeting, by 100 basis 
points in total (see Chart 2.1). After the Governing Council’s meeting in June, the 
interest rates on the deposit facility, the main refinancing operations and the 
marginal lending facility remained unchanged, at 2.00%, 2.15% and 2.40% 
respectively.

The key ECB interest rates were 
cut in the first half of 2025 amid 
continuing signs that inflation was 
moving sustainably towards the 2% 
target

At its first monetary policy meeting of the year the Governing Council assessed that 
the disinflation process remained on track. Inflation was developing in line with the 
latest staff projections and was expected to return to the 2% medium-term target in 
the course of the year. Most measures of underlying inflation indicated that inflation 
would return to target on a sustained basis, although domestic inflation remained 
high owing to delayed adjustments in wages and some services prices following the 
past inflation surge. Signs of moderation in wage growth and the effects of profits 
buffering inflationary pressures further supported the Governing Council’s view that 
disinflation was proceeding as intended, warranting a less restrictive monetary policy 
stance. It therefore decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis 
points.

The Governing Council noted that recent rate cuts were gradually making new 
borrowing less expensive for firms and households. However, financing conditions 
remained tight, in line with the still-restrictive monetary policy. While the euro area 
economy faced ongoing headwinds, rising real incomes and the fading impact of 
past monetary policy restriction were expected to support a gradual rebound in 
demand over time. Nevertheless, risks to growth remained tilted to the downside, 
with greater frictions in global trade and geopolitical uncertainties, including those 
related to Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and the tragic conflict in the 
Middle East, which had the potential to disrupt energy supplies and further weigh on 
global trade.

To support lasting improvements in economic performance, the Governing Council 
emphasised the role of fiscal and structural policies in fostering a more productive, 
competitive and resilient euro area economy. It welcomed the European 
Commission’s Competitiveness Compass and stressed the need to follow up, with 
further concrete and ambitious structural policies, on Mario Draghi’s proposals for 
enhancing European competitiveness and on Enrico Letta’s proposals for 
empowering the Single Market. Governments were urged to fully implement their 
commitments under the EU’s economic governance framework, prioritising growth-
enhancing reforms and investment.

The March ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area entailed a slight 
upward revision in headline inflation, which was expected to average 2.3% in 2025, 
mainly on the back of stronger than expected energy price dynamics. Despite this 
revision, most indicators of underlying inflation continued to suggest that inflation 
would settle sustainably at around the 2% medium-term target. Wage growth 
showed signs of continued moderation, as expected, while profits continued to buffer 
inflationary pressures. In light of these developments, the Governing Council decided 
to cut the three key ECB interest rates by a further 25 basis points in March.

The Governing Council noted that monetary policy was becoming meaningfully less 
restrictive, as the interest rate cuts were lowering borrowing costs for firms and 
households, and supporting a pick-up in loan growth. However, lending still remained 
subdued overall. The staff economic growth projection for 2025 was revised down to 
0.9%, driven by weaker exports and subdued investment amid heightened trade and 
policy uncertainty. Rising real incomes and lower borrowing costs remained the key 
factors expected to underpin a gradual recovery in demand over time, alongside the 
diminishing drag from earlier monetary policy tightening.

As confidence in a sustained return of inflation to target continued to strengthen, the 
Governing Council decided in April to again lower the three key ECB interest rates 
by 25 basis points. The disinflation process remained firmly on track, with both 
headline and core inflation declining in March. Services inflation had eased 
significantly, and most measures of underlying inflation indicated a sustained return 
of inflation to the ECB’s 2% medium-term target. Wage growth continued to show 
further signs of moderation, and profits continued to partially absorb the impact of 
elevated wage growth on inflation, contributing to easing domestic price pressures.

Interest rates were lowered again in 
April as confidence in a sustained 
return of inflation to target 
continued to strengthen

The Governing Council noted that the growth outlook for the euro area had 
deteriorated in response to rising trade tensions. These tensions increased 
uncertainty and posed a risk to household and business confidence. Moreover, the 
adverse and volatile market response to the trade tensions was likely to have a 
tightening impact on financing conditions, further challenging the euro area’s growth 
prospects. At the same time, the euro area economy had been building up some 
resilience against global shocks. A strong labour market, rising real incomes and 
supportive monetary policy were expected to underpin spending, while national and 
EU-level initiatives in defence spending and infrastructure investment were set to 
bolster manufacturing activity. Against the background of high geopolitical risk, the 
Governing Council reiterated the importance of fiscal and structural policies to make 
the euro area more productive and competitive, calling for a swift adoption of 
proposals aimed at simplifying regulatory frameworks and completing the savings 
and investments union. In light of such exceptional uncertainty, the Governing 
Council also reiterated its intention to adhere to a data-dependent and 
meeting-by-meeting approach to setting interest rates.

The euro area economy showed 
resilience against global shocks

As the year progressed, the Governing Council grew increasingly confident that 
inflation dynamics were aligning with the target, while the economy was gradually 
recovering. In June, it decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by an 
additional 25 basis points. Inflation was now hovering around the target. The latest 
Eurosystem staff projections revised headline inflation down for both 2025 and 2026, 
primarily owing to lower energy prices and a stronger euro. The projections for 
inflation excluding energy and food remained broadly unchanged, with wage growth 
moderating visibly and contributing to a sustained return of inflation to target. 
Economic growth in the first quarter of the year had been boosted by firms 
frontloading exports ahead of expected tariff hikes. But growth was also bolstered by 
strong domestic demand.

With inflation hovering around the 
ECB’s 2% medium-term target, 
interest rates were cut by a further 
25 basis points in June

The Governing Council noted that concerns about the tightening impact of financial 
market volatility, observed in April in response to trade tensions, had eased. More 
positive news about global trade policies and improving global risk sentiment had 
contributed to this stabilisation. Corporate borrowing conditions continued to 
improve, with lending rates declining and corporate bond spreads narrowing, while

Despite these favourable developments, the Governing Council assessed that risks 
to growth remained tilted to the downside, driven by global trade tensions and 
geopolitical uncertainty. However, it emphasised that favourable financing conditions 
and increased government investment were expected to support resilience over the 
medium term. The outlook for inflation was more uncertain than usual, reflecting the 
volatile global trade environment, which created two-sided risks. In particular, the 
Governing Council cautioned that inflation could turn out to be lower if higher tariffs 
led to lower demand for euro area exports and induced countries with overcapacity 
to reroute their exports to the euro area. It was considered that trade tensions could 
lead to greater volatility and risk aversion in financial markets, which would weigh on 
domestic demand and would thereby also lower inflation. By contrast, inflation could 
turn out to be higher if a fragmentation of global supply chains pushed up import 
prices and added to capacity constraints in the domestic economy.

As the second half of the year began, the Governing Council decided in July to keep 
interest rates unchanged. Inflation stood at the ECB’s 2% medium-term target, with 
incoming data broadly consistent with the Governing Council’s previous assessment 
of the inflation outlook. Domestic price pressures continued to ease as wage growth 
moderated. Despite challenging global conditions, the euro area economy remained 
resilient overall, supported by robust labour market conditions, rising real incomes 
and favourable financing conditions. The decision to hold rates steady reflected the 
Governing Council’s growing confidence that interest rates had reached an 
appropriate level to ensure that the convergence of inflation to the target proved 
sustainable.

In July the Governing Council 
decided to keep interest rates 
unchanged

Presented with a situation similar to that in July, the Governing Council decided 
again in September to keep interest rates unchanged. The updated ECB staff 
projections indicated headline inflation averaging 2.1% in 2025, slightly higher than 
previously projected, then dropping to 1.7% in 2026 and 1.9% in 2027. The growth 
projection for 2025 was revised up to 1.2%, reflecting stronger than expected 
domestic demand, while the projection for 2026 was lowered slightly, as ongoing 
global uncertainties were expected to weigh on economic activity. The decision in 
September underlined the Governing Council’s data-dependent, meeting-by-meeting 
approach to setting interest rates amid persistent global uncertainties.

The Governing Council also kept 
interest rates unchanged in 
September…

Economic activity had grown by 0.7% in cumulative terms in the first half of 2025, 
supported by robust consumer spending and investment. Headwinds from higher 
tariffs, global competition and a stronger euro were expected to dampen growth for 
the remainder of the year. However, these effects were projected to fade in 2026, 
with consumer spending and business investment benefiting from easing financing 
conditions and continued labour market strength. Inflation remained steady and 
close to the ECB’s target. Domestic price pressures continued to ease, supported by 
moderating wage growth and productivity improvements, which contributed to slower 
labour cost growth.

…as the economy had remained 
stronger than expected in the first 
half of 2025

The Governing Council assessed risks to growth as more balanced than earlier in 
the year. While trade tensions and geopolitical uncertainties persisted, recent trade 
agreements had reduced some of the risks weighing on global demand and 
confidence. Higher than expected defence and infrastructure spending, along with 
productivity-enhancing reforms, would provide additional support for growth over the 
medium term. At the same time, the Governing Council continued to see the outlook 
for inflation as more uncertain than usual, for the same reasons as at the previous 
meetings.

In October the Governing Council held its annual external meeting outside Frankfurt, 
hosted by Banca d’Italia in Florence. Again it decided to keep interest rates 
unchanged, as inflation remained close to the 2% medium-term target and the 
assessment of the inflation outlook was broadly unchanged.

In October the Governing Council 
kept interest rates unchanged

Economic activity had grown modestly in the third quarter, driven by strength in the 
services sector, particularly tourism and digital services offsetting weakness in 
manufacturing, which continued to face headwinds from higher tariffs and global 
competition. Domestic demand was expected to remain resilient, with consumer 
spending supported by rising real incomes, government infrastructure and defence 
investment, and favourable financing conditions. External demand, however, faced 
challenges, with declining goods exports and ongoing trade uncertainties. Annual 
inflation had increased slightly to 2.2% in September, largely driven by energy price 
volatility. At the same time, wage moderation and productivity improvements were 
expected to continue to ease domestic price pressures, and longer-term inflation 
expectations remained firmly anchored.

The Governing Council reiterated its commitment to making retail and wholesale 
central bank money fit for the digital age. In this vein, it decided to move to the next 
stage of the digital euro project, to ensure technical readiness for potential issuance 
once the legislation had been adopted and support Europe’s digital sovereignty (see 
Box 4).

The Governing Council decided to 
move to the next stage of the digital 
euro project

The Governing Council concluded the year with another decision to keep rates 
unchanged. The December Eurosystem staff projections saw inflation averaging 
2.1% in 2025, 1.9% in 2026, 1.8% in 2027 and 2.0% in 2028. Inflation was revised 
up for 2026, mainly because staff expected services inflation to decline more slowly 
than had been foreseen in previous projections. The moderately higher expected 
inflation profile compared with the September projections and the projected return to 
target by 2028 further bolstered the case for keeping policy rates unchanged. 
Moreover, the euro area economy remained resilient, supported by robust labour 
markets, rising real incomes and government spending, despite challenges from 
global trade and geopolitical tensions.

The Governing Council also 
decided to keep interest rates 
unchanged at its final meeting of 
2025

Credit conditions in the economy were broadly stable, while euro area banks 
remained resilient, supported by strong capital and liquidity ratios, solid asset quality 
and robust profitability. Geopolitical uncertainty and the possibility of a sudden 
repricing in global financial markets were seen as posing risks to financial stability in 
the euro area, and the Governing Council reiterated that macroprudential policy

remained the first line of defence against the build-up of financial vulnerabilities, 
enhancing resilience and preserving macroprudential space.

The Governing Council once again reaffirmed its commitment to a data-driven and 
meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy 
stance.

2.2 
Normalisation of the Eurosystem balance sheet 
progressed further

The Eurosystem balance sheet 
gradually decreased as holdings in 
the monetary policy portfolios 
declined

Chart 2.2 
Evolution of the Eurosystem’s consolidated balance sheet

Source: ECB. 
Notes: Positive figures refer to assets and negative figures to liabilities. The line for excess liquidity is presented as a positive figure, 
although it refers to the sum of the following liability items: current account holdings in excess of reserve requirements and recourse to 
the deposit facility.

In line with the Governing Council’s decisions, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
portfolios continued to decline in 2025. Following the end of reinvestments under the 
APP as of July 2023, and under the PEPP at the end of 2024, 2025 marked the first 
year since the start of the programmes in which the Eurosystem did not conduct any 
monetary policy-related asset purchases.

The passive reduction of holdings 
ensured a smooth and predictable 
decline in excess reserves without 
adverse effects on market 
functioning

Redemptions under the APP amounted to €351.4 billion, reducing the portfolio 
holdings to €2.3 trillion (at amortised cost) by year-end. The public sector purchase 
programme (PSPP) accounted for the largest amount of maturing securities, bringing 
PSPP holdings down to €1.9 trillion, 80% of the APP portfolio. The weighted average 
maturity of the PSPP holdings remained broadly unchanged at 6.8 years at the end 
of 2025. Asset-backed securities accounted for less than 1% (€3 billion) of the APP 
portfolio, while covered bonds represented 9% (€210 billion) and corporate sector 
securities 11% (€249 billion).

Under the PEPP, principal redemptions amounted to €185.9 billion in 2025, bringing 
the portfolio holdings down to €1.4 trillion (at amortised cost) by year-end. Public 
sector securities accounted for 97% of the PEPP portfolio (€1.4 trillion) at year-end, 
with a weighted average maturity of 7.0 years. Corporate sector securities accounted 
for 3% (€41 billion), while covered bonds represented less than 1% (€5 billion). The 
transparent publication schedule introduced in January 2025 for PEPP redemptions 
supported the orderly unwinding of the holdings. The schedule aligned PEPP data

releases, including backward and forward-looking redemption profiles, with those of 
the APP, ensuring consistency and predictability across the two portfolios.

Combined APP and PEPP holdings declined by €537.3 billion in 2025, bringing the 
total monetary policy securities portfolio to €3.7 trillion at year-end. The 
Eurosystem’s full transition to passive balance sheet reduction proceeded smoothly 
throughout the year, with no signs of adverse effects on market functioning. Liquidity 
conditions remained orderly, repo markets operated efficiently and private sector 
investors continued to demonstrate steady demand for euro area debt securities.

Overall, developments in 2025 confirm that the unwinding of monetary policy 
portfolio holdings is progressing as expected. The passive reduction regime has 
provided a stable foundation for the continued normalisation of the Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet. This approach has facilitated a smooth and transparent transition to a 
lower level of excess reserves while preserving stable market conditions.

Developments in Eurosystem refinancing operations

At the end of 2025 the outstanding amount of Eurosystem refinancing operations 
stood at €36.7 billion, a marginal increase of €2.5 billion compared with the end of 
2024. The recourse to these operations remained low, reflecting significant excess 
liquidity and the higher cost of Eurosystem funding compared with market-based 
alternatives. At year-end, the outstanding amounts of the main refinancing 
operations and of the three-month longer-term refinancing operations were €25.0 
and €11.7 billion respectively. In December the ECB invited banks to test their 
access to the main refinancing operations and/or the three-month longer-term 
refinancing operations at least once a year, with a bid amount at their discretion and 
against collateral in accordance with the Eurosystem general collateral framework.20

Participation in refinancing 
operations remained at historically 
low levels

Developments in eligible marketable assets and mobilised 
collateral

The nominal value of marketable assets eligible as collateral for Eurosystem 
refinancing operations increased by €939 billion in 2025, reaching €20.3 trillion by 
the end of the year (Chart 2.3). The increase in eligible collateral was driven primarily 
by higher government bond issuance. Central government securities remained the 
largest asset class (€10.9 trillion). Other significant asset classes included unsecured 
bank bonds (€2.3 trillion), corporate bonds (€2.1 trillion) and covered bank bonds 
(€2.0 trillion). Meanwhile, asset classes such as regional government securities 
(€688 billion), asset-backed securities (€669 billion) and other marketable assets 
(€1.7 trillion) accounted for a more limited share of the eligible asset universe.

Eligible and mobilised collateral 
continued to increase, with central 
government securities the main 
contributor

20 See “Counterparties invited to regularly test their operational readiness to access Eurosystem standard 
refinancing operations”, press release, ECB, 19 December 2025.

Chart 2.3 
Developments in eligible marketable assets

Source: ECB. 
Notes: Asset values are nominal amounts. The chart shows averages of end-of-month data for each quarter.

Mobilised collateral increased by €53 billion in 2025, reaching €1.6 trillion by year-
end (Chart 2.4). At the same time, the volume of Eurosystem refinancing operations 
remained low throughout the year, resulting in a historically low ratio of outstanding 
credit from the Eurosystem to the total amount of mobilised collateral, which stood at 
just 1.4% at year-end. Covered bank bonds, credit claims and asset-backed 
securities continued to be the most heavily mobilised asset classes. Asset-backed 
securities experienced a slight increase in mobilisation over 2025, while the largest 
decline in mobilisation was observed for credit claims. The Eurosystem monetary 
policy implementation framework underwent a number of changes in 2025 related to 
the credit assessment and risk control frameworks for assets eligible to be mobilised 
as collateral (see Section 2.3).

Chart 2.4 
Developments in mobilised collateral

Source: ECB. 
Notes: For collateral, the averages of end-of-month data for each quarter are shown, and values are after valuation and haircuts. For 
outstanding credit, daily data are used.

2.3 
The Eurosystem continued to reinforce its financial risk 
management framework

The Eurosystem continuously manages the financial risks inherent in the 
implementation of its monetary policy operations. Its risk management function aims 
to attain risk efficiency, limiting risk taking to the level necessary to meet its monetary 
policy objectives.

The main changes to the Eurosystem’s risk management framework in 2025 were 
related to collateral policies, and consisted of: 1) changes in the use of external 
ratings for assessing the credit quality of certain collateral assets, 2) the introduction 
of targeted enhancements to the risk control framework for specific collateral assets, 
3) the introduction of a “climate factor” in the valuation of certain mobilised collateral 
assets to reflect climate change-related uncertainties, 4) and the inclusion of climate 
change risks in ratings issued by national central banks’ in-house credit assessment 
systems (ICASs). Risks related to the APP and PEPP portfolios continued to be 
managed according to the established risk control frameworks.

Several central banks of the Eurosystem, including the ECB, continued to incur low 
or negative net income in 2025. While the key ECB interest rates have been 
lowered, the cost of liabilities on the balance sheets of most Eurosystem central 
banks exceeded the income generated on their APP and PEPP securities portfolios, 
which resulted in negative net interest income. In addition, the depreciation of foreign 
currencies against the euro negatively affected the foreign reserves portfolios of 
some central banks. Such losses do not affect the ability of the Eurosystem to

Several Eurosystem central banks 
continued to incur losses despite 
lower interest costs

pursue its price stability objective and operate effectively. When a central bank 
incurs negative income, it can use financial buffers built up in previous years to offset 
it or record it on its balance sheet to be offset with future profits. Furthermore, a 
significant increase in the Eurosystem’s financial buffers, driven by higher 
revaluation accounts, in particular those linked to gold holdings, has added 
substantially to its financial resilience.

Changes to the Eurosystem’s financial risk management 
framework

The Eurosystem’s financial risk management framework underwent several changes 
in 2025.

Under new rules, second-best 
ratings will determine collateral 
eligibility and haircuts for private 
sector and non-euro area public 
sector assets

First, in February 2025 the Governing Council decided to amend the rules on using 
external credit ratings for private sector assets, with implementation planned no 
earlier than 18 months from the announcement date. The change concerns ratings 
issued by external credit assessment institutions (ECAIs) for private sector assets 
such as unsecured bank bonds, covered bank bonds and assets issued by non-
financial corporations, and also covers non-euro area public sector assets eligible for 
use as collateral in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations. Once the change 
has been introduced, the second-best rating among the ratings issued by accepted 
ECAIs for such assets will be used to determine their eligibility, as well as the 
applicable valuation haircuts. The amended rules make better use of the available 
external credit rating information. For assets with only one credit rating available 
from accepted ECAIs, a one-notch downgrade will be applied to the available credit 
rating to determine the rating relevant for collateral purposes. Assets issued or 
guaranteed by the euro area public sector (e.g. euro area central, regional and local 
governments; international and supranational issuers located in the euro area whose 
shareholders are located in the EU; and agencies recognised by the ECB) will 
continue to be assessed on the basis of the current first-best rating rule. For these 
assets the Eurosystem makes regular use of all available credit quality information 
and applies enhanced due diligence procedures. For asset-backed securities, the 
second-best issue rating rule already in use will remain unchanged.

Second, the Eurosystem in 2025 conducted a review of the risk control framework 
for collateralised credit operations. The Eurosystem applies risk control measures to 
the assets underlying its credit operations to protect itself against the risk of financial 
loss if the assets have to be sold after the default of a counterparty. The aim of the 
review was to ensure that the framework remains protective, consistent and risk-
equivalent across asset classes. One risk control measure takes the form of 
valuation haircuts, which reduces the amount that can be borrowed in monetary 
policy credit operations for a given collateral value. Following the review, the 
Eurosystem decided to introduce targeted improvements in the haircut methodology, 
with a particular focus on own-used covered bonds, retained asset-backed securities 
and individual credit claims. The implementation of these changes is planned for 
November 2026 at the earliest.

A review of the risk control 
framework resulted in 
improvements to haircut 
methodology

Third, as part of its efforts to address climate-related risks, the Governing Council 
decided in July to introduce a “climate factor” in the collateral framework. The climate 
factor, which is scheduled for implementation as of 15 June 2026, may reduce the 
value assigned to certain marketable assets pledged as collateral, depending on the 
extent to which they are exposed to climate change-related uncertainties. The 
measure is designed to act as a buffer against the potential financial impact of 
climate-related transition shocks. It will complement the Eurosystem’s existing risk 
management framework by incorporating forward-looking climate scenario analyses 
and therefore improve the resilience of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
implementation. The climate factor will focus on marketable assets issued by non-
financial corporations and their affiliated entities and will be calibrated to also 
preserve sufficient collateral availability. The climate factor, including its scope and 
calibration, will be regularly reviewed by the Governing Council. By addressing 
uncertainties linked to adverse events associated with the green transition, the 
Eurosystem will strengthen its ability to mitigate climate-related financial risks.

A “climate factor” applied to the 
valuation of collateral will help 
address climate change-related 
uncertainties

In 2025 all ICAS credit assessments incorporated climate-related risks, in line with 
common Eurosystem standards implemented at the end of 2024. After the ECB 
announced its climate action plan in July 2021, the Eurosystem agreed in 2022 on a 
set of common minimum standards for how ICASs should include climate-related 
risks in their ratings. ICASs are an important source of credit risk assessment for 
credit claims. The common standards require that ICAS rating processes distinguish 
between transition and physical risks and also consider the various climate risk 
transmission channels. The assessment of climate-related risks is conducted by 
ICASs at firm level whenever sufficient and reliable data are available, with the aim 
of determining whether and to what degree climate change risk affects the 
creditworthiness of rated non-financial corporations.

ICAS credit assessments 
incorporated climate change risks

Managing risks of asset holdings in the APP and PEPP portfolios

The APP and PEPP portfolios declined at a gradual and predictable pace in 2025, 
the Eurosystem having discontinued reinvestments in these portfolios. The financial 
risks of these programmes continue to be managed with the previously established 
risk control frameworks. Both programmes are composed of different types of asset 
class, namely public sector and corporate sector debt securities as well as asset-
backed securities and covered bonds. The risk frameworks take into account each 
programme’s policy objectives and the risk profiles of the different asset classes it 
contains. They consist of eligibility criteria, credit risk assessments and due diligence 
procedures, pricing frameworks, benchmarks and limits.

The risks from the APP and PEPP 
are managed with the previously 
established frameworks

Box 2 
 
The 2025 monetary policy strategy assessment

On 30 June 2025 the Governing Council announced the outcome of the ECB’s monetary policy 
strategy assessment, carried out to ensure that the strategy remains fit for purpose. The 
assessment followed the strategy review concluded in 2021, in line with the ECB’s pledge to 
undertake such reviews periodically. The 2025 assessment was narrower in scope than the

previous review, which had been a fully fledged re-evaluation of the ECB’s monetary policy 
framework. In particular, the assessment aimed to incorporate lessons from the major change in the 
inflation environment that had taken place in the meantime and from monetary policy measures 
taken over this period.

The strategy assessment was a collaborative effort between the ECB and national central banks of 
the Eurosystem. The process was organised into two separate work streams, each focusing on 
specific aspects of the strategy and supported by significant analytical and technical resources 
provided by staff across the Eurosystem. The insights from each of these work streams were 
published as ECB Occasional Papers.

The 2025 assessment reaffirmed the symmetric 2% inflation target over the medium term as the 
cornerstone of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. The Governing Council recognised that, to 
maintain symmetry, it is important to take appropriately forceful or persistent monetary policy action 
in response to large, sustained deviations of inflation from the target in either direction. This is 
necessary to avoid deviations becoming entrenched through de-anchored inflation expectations.

The assessment further highlighted the need to account for ongoing structural shifts, such as 
geopolitical and economic fragmentation, demographic change, digitalisation and the increasing 
use of artificial intelligence, the threat to environmental sustainability, and changes in the 
international financial system. These developments suggest that the inflation environment will 
remain uncertain and potentially more volatile, posing challenges for monetary policy. In this 
context, the Governing Council emphasised the importance of monetary policy decisions taking into 
account not only the most likely path for inflation and the economy but also surrounding risks and 
uncertainty, including through the appropriate use of scenario and sensitivity analyses. In line with 
the 2021 review, the Governing Council reaffirmed its commitment to taking financial stability 
considerations into account in its monetary policy deliberations. It also reaffirmed its commitment, 
within its mandate, to ensuring that the Eurosystem fully takes into account the implications of 
climate change for monetary policy, while expanding this to cover nature degradation. The 
Governing Council reiterated the importance of clear and transparent communication of monetary 
policy decisions to support public understanding of and trust in the actions of the ECB.

The assessment reconfirmed that the primary monetary policy instrument is the set of ECB policy 
rates. All other monetary policy instruments currently available to the ECB – such as longer-term 
refinancing operations, asset purchases, negative interest rates and forward guidance – also 
remain part of the toolkit. These may be employed, as appropriate, to steer the monetary policy 
stance when the policy rates are close to the effective lower bound or to preserve the smooth 
functioning of monetary policy transmission. The choice, design and implementation of instruments 
will enable an agile response to new shocks and will be subject to a comprehensive proportionality 
assessment. The Governing Council will continue to respond flexibly to new challenges as they 
arise and will consider, as needed, new policy instruments in the pursuit of its price stability 
objective.

The Governing Council concluded that the ECB’s updated monetary policy strategy is well-
equipped to ensure price stability in the face of evolving challenges. The strategy’s medium-term 
orientation provides the flexibility needed to respond to deviations from the inflation target in a 
context-specific manner depending on the origin, magnitude and persistence of the deviation, while

maintaining anchored inflation expectations. This flexibility is particularly valuable in the current 
environment of heightened uncertainty, marked by geopolitical tensions, trade fragmentation and 
volatile energy prices.

The Governing Council intends to conduct periodic strategy assessments, with the next assessment 
expected in 2030. This will ensure that the Eurosystem remains agile and responsive to structural 
changes, enabling it to effectively deliver on its price stability mandate.

3 
European financial sector: navigating 
heightened geopolitical and market risks 
amid structural challenges

In 2025 financial stability risks in the euro area remained elevated amid heightened 
geopolitical tensions, trade fragmentation and increased global policy uncertainty. 
Tariff shocks and weaker external demand weighed on corporate profitability and 
added to credit risk. Sovereign vulnerabilities were driven by high debt levels, the 
prospect of higher defence expenditures and investment needs, and spillovers due 
to concerns about global fiscal sustainability. Banks’ strong capitalisation and 
profitability continued to underpin their resilience despite rising credit and market 
risk, and persistent vulnerabilities in the non-bank financial intermediation (NBFI) 
sector owing to leverage, liquidity mismatches and interconnectedness. Despite 
these underlying vulnerabilities, however, the NBFI sector also remained broadly 
resilient. Macroprudential policy focused on preserving resilience by maintaining and, 
in some cases, increasing capital buffers and borrower-based measures. Regarding 
microprudential supervision, advances were made in simplification, digital 
operational resilience and incorporating climate and nature‑related risk into the 
supervisory agenda, while stress tests confirmed banks’ robustness. During the year 
the ECB also worked on developing proposals for simplifying the European 
regulatory, supervisory and reporting frameworks. Important legislative initiatives 
progressed, including the implementation of the final Basel III reforms, the reform of 
the EU’s crisis management and deposit insurance framework and steps towards the 
savings and investments union.

3.1 
The financial stability environment in 2025

Financial stability vulnerabilities in the euro area remained elevated in 2025, against 
a backdrop of heightened geopolitical tensions and rising concerns about 
geoeconomic fragmentation. Global economic policy uncertainty surged, driven 
largely by changes in the US trade landscape and regulatory and fiscal policies, as 
well as by concerns about a general retreat from multilateralism. The announcement 
of higher than expected US import tariffs in early April 2025 triggered a pronounced 
spike in market volatility across asset classes and a marked sell-off in riskier assets, 
reflecting investors’ reassessment of global growth prospects and the risk of deeper 
geoeconomic fragmentation. Later in the year trade agreements between the United 
States and several of its main trading partners, including the EU, eased trade policy 
uncertainty and calmed markets. However, as a highly open economy that is deeply 
integrated into global value chains, the euro area remained particularly exposed to 
geoeconomic fragmentation risks.

Elevated uncertainty and trade 
tensions weighed on euro area 
financial stability

Sovereign vulnerabilities in the euro area stemmed from still elevated debt levels in 
some countries, rising issuance needs and changing investor demand. The 
Eurosystem’s reduced footprint in bond markets, combined with expectations of 
higher government financing needs, led to a steepening of euro area yield curves 
over the year, which also reflects global concerns over the sustainability of US long-
term debt and the external financing required to fund the US twin deficits. While 
strong credit fundamentals and rating upgrades in several euro area countries 
helped to compress sovereign spreads, spreads widened in countries facing fiscal 
challenges and rating downgrades. At the same time, fiscal fragilities in major 
advanced economies, including the US budget impasse and a temporary US 
government shutdown, raised concerns about global sovereign debt sustainability 
and the risk of a broader reassessment of sovereign risk in the euro area. 
Furthermore, the need to respond to elevated geopolitical tensions and hybrid 
threats highlights the urgency for euro area NATO member countries to boost 
defence spending to meet the new NATO target of 5% of GDP by 2035. However, 
higher defence spending, together with planned large-scale infrastructure and 
climate-related investments, implies sizeable additional financing needs in the 
medium term. This could raise concerns about sovereign debt sustainability in some 
euro area countries, and the resulting increase in sovereign yields could spill over to 
corporate and financial sector funding conditions through higher risk premia and 
potential rating downgrades.

Sovereign vulnerabilities remained 
contained overall, but higher 
issuance needs and fiscal risk 
weighed on some countries

Vulnerabilities in the euro area corporate sector remained elevated in 2025 as the 
impact of higher tariffs and persistent trade tensions fed through more strongly. 
While balance sheets had strengthened in previous years, and aggregate 
indebtedness had fallen below levels seen before the global financial crisis, 
profitability came under pressure from subdued external demand, elevated debt 
service costs and rising labour expenses. The appreciation of the euro and higher 
tariffs on euro area exports eroded the price competitiveness of euro area firms in 
global markets. This led to a loss of market share that was squeezed further by 
strong competition from Chinese exporters, partly reflecting weak domestic demand 
in China. Insolvencies rose across a broad range of sectors and countries, reflecting 
the still weak and uncertain business environment and increasing the risk of broader 
macro-financial spillovers, notably from tariff-sensitive and export-oriented sectors.

Corporate vulnerabilities remained 
elevated, with risks of spillovers to 
household balance sheets

Household balance sheets strengthened over the year, supported by buoyant labour 
markets, rising real wages and a continued reduction in debt-to-GDP ratios, which 
bolstered debt servicing capacity and provided buffers against adverse shocks. This 
resilience was also underpinned by the large stock of savings accumulated during 
earlier periods of uncertainty and sustained by persistently high savings rates. 
However, this benign situation could reverse if trade-related corporate vulnerabilities 
were to unfold more forcefully. A rise in bankruptcies and lay-offs in tariff-sensitive 
sectors could weaken labour market conditions, weigh on wage growth and dent 
consumer confidence, thereby adversely affecting household consumption and 
borrowers’ resilience.

The resilience of the euro area banking sector remained a key stabilising factor for 
the financial system in 2025. Bank capital and liquidity ratios stayed well above

Bank profitability and capital buffers 
remained strong, but credit risks 
from trade tensions increased

regulatory requirements. Strong net interest income, together with solid net fee and 
commission income, underpinned returns on equity above 9% in 2025. Furthermore, 
improved market sentiment towards the sector, alongside expectations of sustained 
profits and record profit distributions in the form of dividends and share buybacks, 
boosted bank stock prices and lifted price-to-book ratios to new post-global financial 
crisis highs, gradually narrowing the gap with those of US peers.

The aggregate non-performing loans (NPL) ratio of significant institutions remained 
close to historical lows in 2025. At the same time, credit risks in banks’ loan 
portfolios increased somewhat for loans to small and medium sized-enterprises and 
for consumer loans. In addition, the combination of weak macro-financial conditions, 
the lagged impact of past interest rate increases, and escalating trade tensions tilted 
the credit risk outlook to the downside for exposures to both firms and households. 
Banks with concentrated exposures to sectors reliant on extra-EU trade or to regions 
more affected by trade frictions could face increased pressure on asset quality if 
trade fragmentation were to intensify or economic conditions were to weaken further. 
In such a scenario, higher provisioning needs could weigh on banks’ profitability, 
even though their capital buffers provide a substantial cushion against losses.

Euro area and global financial markets experienced bouts of heightened volatility in 
2025, notably after the US tariff announcements in early April, which triggered a 
sharp repricing and sell-offs in riskier assets. While market functioning in the euro 
area was still orderly overall, and volatility subsided after the announcement of a 
temporary tariff pause and subsequent trade agreements, valuations in some asset 
classes remained elevated. This left markets vulnerable to renewed sharp, abrupt 
adjustments if liquidity conditions were to deteriorate. At the same time, concerns 
about US fiscal fundamentals and institutional credibility weakened the safe-haven 
status of US Treasuries and the US dollar, increasing the risk that sudden shifts in 
global capital flows and disorderly exchange rate fluctuations could spill over to euro 
area financial conditions.

Financial markets were still 
vulnerable to sharp repricing, amid 
stretched valuations and spillover 
risks from the United States

The market footprint of the NBFI sector in the euro area continued to expand in 
2025, supporting deeper and more diversified capital markets for financing the real 
economy. Despite heightened policy uncertainty and recurring episodes of market 
volatility, the sector remained resilient overall. At the same time, liquidity mismatches 
persisted across several NBFI segments and were compounded by pockets of high 
leverage, particularly in parts of the investment fund segment. These structural 
fragilities left the NBFI sector exposed to adverse price movements, abrupt fund 
outflows and spikes in margin and collateral calls, potentially triggering procyclical 
asset sales and amplifying market stress. Interlinkages with euro area banks 
continued to expose both the NBFI sector and the banking sector to spillover risk via 
credit and funding channels.

The NBFI sector continued to 
expand in 2025, although it 
remained exposed to vulnerabilities

Overall, while the euro area financial system proved resilient in 2025, risks to 
financial stability remained elevated. In addition to cyclical pressures from weaker 
growth and trade tensions, several structural factors continued to weigh on the risk 
outlook. Cybersecurity weaknesses and hybrid threats became more salient in an 
increasingly complex geopolitical landscape. The rapid adoption of artificial

While the euro area financial 
system proved resilient, structural 
vulnerabilities could amplify cyclical 
risks

intelligence offered efficiency gains, but also created new channels for operational 
risk and market disruption.

At the global level, growing regulatory fragmentation and renewed calls for 
deregulation are likely to encourage cross-border arbitrage and a build-up of 
vulnerabilities outside the regulatory perimeter.

Looking ahead, demographic trends related to ageing populations, together with the 
ongoing transition to a low-carbon economy, are expected to affect growth 
prospects. While the transition entails costs, it also creates economic opportunities, 
and both factors could interact with existing cyclical and structural vulnerabilities in 
ways that challenge financial stability. If several of these risks were to materialise at 
the same time, they could become mutually reinforcing and significantly increase 
stress in the financial system.

The ECB has the task of assessing macroprudential capital measures proposed by 
national authorities for banks in countries participating in the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM). Importantly, it also has the power to apply more stringent capital 
measures if necessary. The ECB’s close monitoring of national macroprudential 
policy stances in 2025 did not identify a need for this, as several countries had 
already implemented macroprudential measures to strengthen the resilience of their 
banking systems to accumulated vulnerabilities and downside risks.

In 2025 the ECB did not identify a 
need to apply more stringent capital 
measures

Preserving the resilience of the financial system remained the main 
priority

In July 2025 the Governing Council issued a statement calling on national 
macroprudential authorities to maintain existing capital buffer requirements in order 
to preserve the resilience of the banking sector and ensure that buffers are available 
in case the banking sector or macro-financial conditions deteriorate. The statement 
referred to heightened risks to financial stability stemming from a sharp rise in global 
geopolitical uncertainty. In this context, the Governing Council expressed its full 
support for those national authorities that were planning to increase capital buffer 
requirements to address vulnerabilities while prevailing banking sector conditions 
were limiting the risk of procyclicality. It also called on national authorities to maintain 
existing borrower-based measures to preserve sound and sustainable lending 
standards. The statement indicated that a targeted recalibration or simplification of 
macroprudential measures could be considered where the sources of systemic risk 
had changed persistently and when such actions would not result in a reduction of 
the overall resilience of the banking sector. Lastly, the Governing Council noted that, 
considering the high level of uncertainty, macroprudential policy needed to remain 
agile and adapt to changing conditions.

The Governing Council called on 
national authorities to maintain 
existing capital buffers and 
borrower-based measures

Against this background, some national authorities continued to tighten 
macroprudential policy in 2025 to boost the resilience of banks. In particular, two 
participating countries announced an increase in the countercyclical capital buffer 
rate, while another announced the introduction of the systemic risk buffer (SyRB).21 
By the end of the year, all participating countries had a releasable capital buffer in 
place. Nevertheless, some countries decided to either deactivate or reduce systemic 
risk buffers on account of lower systemic risk in sectors that had seen an 
accumulation of vulnerabilities in the past.22 Furthermore, some countries, for 
individual institutions, adjusted the levels of the buffer for global systemically 
important institutions (G-SIIs) and the buffer for other systemically important 
institutions (O-SIIs). For the latter, this was due to the phased introduction of the 
enhanced floor methodology for assessing O-SII buffers from January 2025.23 
Lastly, in addition to capital-based measures, one country implemented borrower-
based measures, bringing the number of countries with such measures in place to 
18.24

The ECB communicated its views on macroprudential policy topics in 2025. In the 
May issue of its Financial Stability Review, it stated its support for the revision of the 
EU macroprudential framework aimed at enhancing its effectiveness, streamlining 
processes and establishing consistency across jurisdictions.25 In this respect, the 
ECB pointed out that ensuring the usability and releasability of macroprudential 
buffers was crucial given the complex interaction between prudential and resolution 
frameworks. In the November issue of the Financial Stability Review, the ECB 
stressed that macroprudential policy should remain firmly focused on safeguarding 
financial stability, thereby benefiting the economy without compromising the banking 
sector’s competitiveness as measured by profit efficiency. While it had been argued 
that higher capital requirements restrict credit supply and weaken banks’ 
competitiveness, the ECB indicated that recent empirical evidence did not align with 
this view.26

The ECB supported the revision of 
the EU macroprudential framework, 
underlining financial stability as a 
policy priority

In April 2025 the ECB submitted a non-paper on EU and third country stablecoin 
multi-issuance to the Council of the European Union, highlighting the risks to 
financial stability of authorising one stablecoin for issuance simultaneously by an 
entity authorised under the Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCAR)29 and 
another entity under a third-country jurisdiction. In the event of a crisis, the reserves 
held by the EU issuer could become quickly depleted if holders of the stablecoin are 
less well protected under the third-country’s regulation. The ESRB devoted part of its

The ESRB and the ECB expressed 
concerns about stablecoins and 
proposed ways to address them

report on systemic risks from crypto-assets to an in-depth analysis of the risks of 
multi-issuance. Furthermore, it issued a recommendation on third-country multi-
issuer stablecoin schemes30, calling on the European Commission to clarify that 
multi-issuance with third-country issuers is not permissible under MiCAR and to 
develop appropriate safeguards to prevent multi-issuance from causing systemic 
risk.

In 2025 banks under ECB supervision demonstrated strong resilience in a 
challenging economic and geopolitical environment. Overall, the euro area banking 
sector remained well capitalised. In the third quarter of 2025, the aggregate Common 
Equity Tier 1 ratio stood at 16.1%, while the aggregate NPL ratio of significant 
institutions remained roughly stable at 1.9%, significantly lower than over the past 
decade.31

Banks showed strong resilience in a 
challenging environment

Several simplification initiatives 
were advanced, while maintaining 
the resilience of banks

Digital operational resilience 
remained a key priority

In 2025 the ECB conducted a system-wide stress test, which confirmed that the euro 
area banking sector remains resilient to a severe but plausible economic downturn.34 
Despite substantial projected losses, capital depletion remained lower than in 
previous stress tests, reflecting strong profitability and stable asset quality. Under the 
adverse scenario, the aggregate CET1 ratio would stand at 12.0%, confirming that 
current capital buffers are supportive of banks’ ability to withstand adverse shocks.

The 2025 stress test results 
revealed that the euro area banking 
sector is resilient to a severe but 
plausible economic downturn

Geopolitical risk remained a key focus of the ECB’s supervisory priorities given the 
heightened global uncertainties and the interconnected nature of the associated 
risks. Accordingly, the ECB continued to emphasise the importance of banks 
integrating geopolitical risk into their overall risk management frameworks and 
maintaining broad-based resilience. In addition, supervising banks’ ability to 
adequately manage climate and nature-related risk remained high on the supervisory 
agenda. In this regard, the ECB completed a multi-year programme to advance 
banks’ risk management capabilities and continued to move towards a business-as-
usual approach by supervising climate and nature-related risks as part of its regular 
supervisory assessments and processes.

Geopolitical risk and climate and 
nature-related risk were still high on 
the supervisory agenda

In 2025 significant progress was made on strengthening the EU’s financial regulatory 
and supervisory framework. The bulk of the Basel III reforms entered into force, with 
the remaining elements on track for implementation. The ECB supported key 
legislative initiatives, including targeted adjustments to prudential requirements, and 
contributed to developing the regulatory framework for crypto-assets. It also provided 
technical input to the co-legislators on policy discussions related to the review of the 
crisis management and deposit insurance framework. The agreement reached by 
the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union on that review 
marked a significant milestone on the path towards completing the banking union 
and strengthening the EU’s bank resolution framework. The ECB continued to 
contribute to policy discussions on NBFI and the savings and investments union, 
notably regarding legislative initiatives aimed at reducing fragmentation in EU 
financial markets, which will continue in 2026. In December 2025 the Governing 
Council put forward recommendations to the European Commission and co-
legislators for simplifying the European prudential regulatory, supervisory and 
reporting framework for banks (see Box 3).

Important policy initiatives to 
strengthen the resilience and 
competitiveness of the European 
financial sector advanced in 2025

During 2025 the ECB continued to emphasise the importance of addressing 
structural vulnerabilities in the NBFI sector and strengthening the relevant policy 
framework from a macroprudential perspective. It contributed to discussions on 
enhancing the macroprudential toolkit for the asset management sector and 
improving policy coordination across EU Member States, while underlining the 
importance of the full and timely implementation of international recommendations to 
address liquidity risk in open-ended and money market funds.43

In parallel, the ECB highlighted the need to address risk from leverage in the NBFI 
sector and to enhance cross-border information sharing, contributing to the 
development of international policy recommendations to mitigate related systemic 
risks.44,45 Furthermore, it actively contributed to promoting and monitoring the 
implementation of the regulatory response to crypto-asset activities in international 
fora, including through its involvement in the Thematic Review of the Global 
Regulatory Framework for Crypto-asset Activities conducted by the Financial 
Stability Board.46

Accelerated progress towards the savings and investments union continued to be a 
key priority for the ECB in 2025. This is an essential step in strengthening Europe’s 
competitiveness, strategic autonomy and financial stability, while supporting the 
efficient financing of the real economy.47

• 
simplifying the framework, while maintaining the resilience of the European banking system 
and ensuring that microprudential, macroprudential and resolution authorities can continue to 
meet their objectives effectively;

• 
fostering European harmonisation and financial integration;

• 
ensuring full, timely and faithful implementation of Basel III.

In terms of scope, the recommendations cover three main areas: the regulatory framework, the 
supervisory framework and the reporting framework.

One of the recommendations was to simplify the design of banks’ capital requirements and buffers, 
also known as the capital stack, by making two changes. First, merging the existing capital buffers 
into just two: a non-releasable buffer and a releasable buffer, which authorities could lower in bad 
times. With any reduction in the number of buffers, it will be important to preserve the authorities’ 
current powers and competences. Second, reducing the leverage ratio framework from four 
elements to two, namely a 3% minimum requirement and a single buffer, which could be set to zero 
for smaller banks.

To improve the quality of banks’ capital, the Governing Council proposed enhancing the capacity of 
Additional Tier 1 capital to absorb losses when a bank is operating normally, which would be Basel-
compliant and maintain resilience. Alternatively, non-equity elements could possibly be removed 
from the going-concern capital stack provided that Basel compliance and capital neutrality were not 
compromised.

The Governing Council also proposed significantly increasing proportionality under EU banking 
rules by expanding the existing small and non-complex institution (SNCI) regime to include more 
banks and simplifying the applicable rules in a prudent and harmonised manner. To this end, the 
small bank regimes in the United Kingdom, Switzerland and the United States could be drawn on 
for inspiration.

To simplify the macroprudential framework, the Governing Council recommended automatic 
reciprocation of macroprudential measures up to a certain threshold, conditional on a more 
standardised application of macroprudential tools across Member States. This would ensure that all 
banks which are active in a Member State that applies a macroprudential measure would be subject 
to that measure.

Regarding the resolution framework, the Governing Council recommended aligning the minimum 
requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities more closely with the total loss-absorbing capacity 
requirement that applies to global systemically important banks. This would need to be done without 
reducing gone-concern resources, thereby keeping the EU in line with international standards and 
making the rules more transparent and predictable. Access to additional funds also needs to be 
ensured.

To achieve further harmonisation, the Governing Council recommended shifting EU banking rules 
from directives to directly applicable regulations.

With regard to supervision, the Governing Council recommended completing the Single Rulebook 
and harmonising rules on licensing, governance and transactions with related parties, such as 
shareholders and board members, which would reduce complexity in the conduct of supervision. To 
this end, supervisors would need to be given greater flexibility, for example, in how often they 
review banks’ internal models.

Furthermore, the Governing Council proposed simplifying the EU-wide stress test by streamlining 
its methodology and scope, and making its results more useful from a banking system and 
individual bank perspective. The results of this revised stress test exercise would help increase the 
coordination between macroprudential and microprudential buffers.

The Governing Council also proposed being made responsible for taking a holistic view of overall 
capital in the banking union and cross-country heterogeneities, which is currently missing. This 
could be done by expanding the role of the Macroprudential Forum, which already brings together 
the Governing Council and the Supervisory Board, in order to improve coordination and consistency 
across Member States when setting microprudential and macroprudential instruments.

The Governing Council strongly encouraged the completion of both the banking union and the 
savings and investments union to reduce national fragmentation and allow for more efficient capital 
markets.

With regard to reporting, the Governing Council proposed that European authorities could share 
their data more widely with each other, allowing banks to report only once, thereby creating a fully 
integrated reporting system at the European level for statistical, prudential and resolution purposes. 
Ideally, this would be done through the Joint Bank Reporting Committee.54 All reporting 
requirements could be reviewed every three to five years to ensure they are still needed. Banks and 
supervisors would focus on the important data, disregarding minor reporting errors by implementing 
a materiality threshold for data resubmission requests. Consolidating supervisory and disclosure 
data would further reduce reporting efforts, with public disclosure (Pillar 3 reports) derived from 
supervisory reporting.

In 2025 payment traffic increased across all TARGET Services. T2 settled on 
average 431,067 payments in euro per day, representing a 2.2% increase compared 
with the previous year, which was driven mainly by payments sent by banks on 
behalf of customers. T2S settled a daily average volume of 922,533 transactions, a 
16.6% increase, which was broadly spread across markets. The EU Instant 
Payments Regulation55, which required payment service providers in the euro area 
to be able to receive and send instant payments by 9 January and 9 October 2025 
respectively, led to a substantial rise in euro-denominated TIPS activity in 2025.56 
The daily average number of transactions grew from 1,657,421 payments in 
December 2024 to 1,883,368 in January 2025 and 3,845,376 in December 2025, 
more than doubling during the course of the year.

The Eurosystem made substantial advancements in the evolution of all TARGET 
Services in 2025. A number of operational and product enhancements were 
implemented to increase the efficiency of T2 for participants and central banks. 
Furthermore, in 2025 the Eurosystem granted non-bank payment service providers 
access to central bank-operated payment systems, including TARGET. In June, the 
Eurosystem launched a public consultation on a possible extension of T2 operating 
hours. After all responses have been processed, a report will be published in the first 
half of 2026. Finally, preparation work progressed on the T2 adaptations needed for 
the digital euro project.

The evolution of TARGET Services 
brought significant efficiency gains

56 Other provisions of the Regulation also had an impact on the volume and value of instant payments 
settled, in particular the requirement for payment service providers to set charges for instant payments 
no higher than those applied to other credit transfers, and the removal of the cap on the maximum value 
for instant payments.

Consequently, the processing of securities settlement instructions, payments, 
ancillary system settlements, and liquidity transfers between TARGET Services was 
suspended. As a follow-up to the incident, the TARGET Services governance bodies 
identified 20 measures to enhance contingency arrangements in the future.58 The 
measures include: (i) the replacement of a faulty physical component, (ii) the review 
of the business continuity management and the IT service continuity management, 
and (iii) the collection of detailed market feedback on the effectiveness of cut-off 
delays following a long-lasting outage. Significant progress has been achieved on 
the measures identified, with most having been implemented by the fourth quarter of 
2025.59 Other incidents, which also affected the availability of the TARGET Services 
although to a lesser extent (in particular in March, May and November 2025), were 
also carefully managed by the Eurosystem, with further lessons being identified.

The Eurosystem’s actions to shape the future of Europe’s payments and market 
infrastructure are driven by three imperatives: innovation, integration and 
independence. The Eurosystem is using innovative technology to further digitalise 
retail and wholesale payments and securities markets, and fostering deeper 
integration and competition through harmonisation and standardisation, for example 
in the post-trade sphere. Combined with the deployment of pan-European solutions, 
these efforts will be pivotal in improving the efficiency of transactions as well as 
bolstering Europe’s strategic autonomy and resilience. They will reinforce its 
monetary sovereignty and elevate the international role of the euro, while helping to 
preserve financial stability.

The Eurosystem took important steps in 2025 to advance its work on the digital euro, 
to ensure people’s access to public money in the digital age. The digital euro would 
be a digital form of cash that complements banknotes and coins as well as other 
digital means of payment. It would offer a simple and universally accepted way to 
pay across the euro area, free for basic use, with high standards of privacy, security 
and accessibility. In October 2025 the Governing Council decided to move to the 
next project phase. More detailed information on the project can be found in Box 4.

Building on the success of the Eurosystem’s exploratory work with distributed ledger 
technology (DLT), the Governing Council in 2025 approved a strategic plan to

The use of a common messaging standard for collateral is required by the Single 
Collateral Management Rulebook for Europe (SCoRE) standards and is key for 
improving the automation of corporate action and triparty collateral management 
processing. In December 2025 the Eurosystem’s Advisory Group on Market 
Infrastructures for Securities and Collateral (AMI-SeCo) set out a roadmap in its ISO 
20022 Migration Strategy for a market-wide transition to ISO 20022. AMI-SeCo also 
published a comprehensive report on remaining barriers to post-trade integration in 
Europe. The 2025 Corporate Events Compliance Report and the SCoREBOARD 
Compliance and Progress Report for the second half of 2025 both highlight limited 
progress and delays in compliance with AMI-SeCo standards. The Eurosystem is 
therefore seeking feedback from relevant stakeholders on their concrete steps and 
timeline to achieve full compliance with the ScoRE standards. AMI-SeCo supports 
the EU’s planned changeover to a shorter settlement cycle (T+1) in some areas of 
corporate events processing.

Digitalisation is changing the way people pay. More and more payments in shops are made digitally, 
cash is being used less, and online shopping is on the rise. A digital euro would preserve the 
possibility to pay with public money, complementing cash with its equivalent for digital payments. It 
would be accessible for all, free for basic use and accepted for any digital payment, throughout the 
euro area. The digital euro would be cost-efficient and respect the highest privacy standards. It 
would increase convenience for consumers and lower fees for merchants. The digital euro’s open 
standards would also allow European private payment solutions to scale up more easily, thereby 
uniting the euro area’s fragmented retail payments market and fostering innovation in Europe. 
Through its technical architecture and offline functionality, it would make retail payments in the euro 
area more resilient and ensure payments can be made between two devices close to each other 
even without an internet connection, with cash-like privacy.60

The completion of the digital euro project preparation phase marks an important transition in the 
project. Building on the insights gained during the investigation phase conducted from 2021 to 2023, 
we moved towards refining the practical design. Key achievements include (i) the development of the 
draft digital euro scheme rulebook, (ii) the selection of providers for digital euro components and 
related services, (iii) the successful running of an innovation platform for experimentation with market 
participants, as well as (iv) the investigation by a technical workstream into the fit of the digital euro in 
the payment ecosystem. To ensure that the digital euro is designed to meet the needs of European 
citizens and merchants, the Eurosystem also commissioned extensive user research targeting 
vulnerable consumers and small merchants. The ECB demonstrated that the costs of the digital euro 
for banks would be contained, given the potential for leveraging synergies and banks’ cost 
mutualisation practices. The ECB deepened its technical work on security, resilience and the financial 
stability impact of the digital euro, providing technical input to the EU legislators on request.

While digitalisation in finance has been under way for decades, distributed ledger 
technology (DLT) has the potential to push the technological frontier significantly further. 
DLT enables the tokenisation of finance, a process in which assets are issued or represented as 
digital “tokens” on a distributed ledger. Tokenisation has the potential to increase efficiency, 
transparency and automation in transactions, with potentially major effects on market infrastructure 
and the roles of market participants. The Eurosystem is seizing this moment to – in line with its 
mandate – ensure that Europe remains competitive, integrated and strategically autonomous in 
shaping its digital future. It is at the same time safeguarding the effectiveness of monetary policy 
and financial stability by keeping central bank money at the core of the monetary system.

The Eurosystem’s strategy on DLT embodies the three imperatives of innovation, integration 
and independence.

Innovation: the Eurosystem is embracing innovation, without compromising on safety. The 
initiatives will provide financial markets with a settlement layer in central bank money, which is free 
from the credit and liquidity risks of private settlement assets. Central bank money is the robust 
foundation that makes innovation sustainable and trustworthy.

Integration: Europe’s post-trade landscape remains fragmented.62 This raises costs, reduces 
liquidity and complicates cross-border activity through differing rules, fees and procedures. The 
market integration package proposed by the European Commission recognises this challenge and

aims to promote deeper capital market integration. DLT can help by enabling shared, cross-
jurisdictional market infrastructures, for which harmonisation and interoperability must be 
considered from the outset.

Independence: Europe needs strategic autonomy in an ever-changing global landscape. Pontes 
and Appia will support this by building an ecosystem around central bank money as a trusted public 
settlement asset enabling the safe development of regulated private settlement assets in euro.

The comprehensive assessment of TARGET Services which was finalised in 2025 
concluded that the services are largely compliant with the applicable oversight 
requirements. Recommendations were issued in relation to, especially, the 
governance of risk management and the integration of cyber processes into 
operational risk management. The findings were not considered to pose a serious 
risk. Incidents affecting TARGET Services in 2025 were reviewed, above all the 
major incident in February and further incidents in March, May and November. The 
review resulted in recommendations in relation to the major incident and business 
continuity management processes.

The Eurosystem’s swap and repo lines with non-euro area central banks are 
monetary policy instruments that are used as stabilising tools in times of stress in 
global financial markets. In 2025 euro liquidity lines again provided a backstop to 
market-based funding. The ECB also continued to offer US dollar operations to 
eligible euro area counterparties on a regular basis, backed by the standing swap 
line network of major central banks, comprising the ECB together with the Federal 
Reserve System, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan and 
the Swiss National Bank. The ECB did not intervene in the foreign exchange market 
in 2025. It remained responsible for the administration of various financial operations 
on behalf of the EU and continued to coordinate the Eurosystem reserve 
management services framework.

The Eurosystem’s swap and repo lines are monetary policy instruments that help 
prevent tensions in international funding markets from hampering the effectiveness 
of euro area monetary policy transmission. Table 5.1 shows the liquidity lines in 
operation as at 31 December 2025. Drawings on the euro liquidity lines in 2025 
remained very limited.

In 2025 the level of euro banknotes in circulation increased again. In line with the 
Eurosystem’s commitment to ensure that cash remains available, accessible and 
accepted as means of payment, while also being as sustainable and environmentally 
friendly as possible, the process to redesign the euro banknotes continued. This 
process will enhance the security of euro banknotes and also provide an opportunity 
to make them more relatable to all Europeans.

Over the period 2015-25 the value of cash in circulation consistently exceeded 10% 
of euro area GDP, underscoring the relevance of cash as a means of payment and 
as a liquid asset held for transaction and precautionary purposes. The growth in 
banknotes in circulation was also driven by the international use of the euro.

The value of cash in circulation was 
above 10% of euro area GDP 
throughout the past decade, 
underlining the importance of cash

Credit institutions returned 24.5 billion banknotes to the euro area national central 
banks (NCBs) in 2025, which is a slight decrease of 0.9 billion banknotes compared 
with 2024. In terms of value, the banknotes deposited at the NCBs totalled 
€833 billion in 2025, down from €856 billion in 2024. This decline was partly due to

credit institutions recirculating higher volumes of banknotes to customers, instead of 
returning them to the NCBs.

The rise in euro banknotes in circulation demonstrates the continued need for 
forward-looking policies that safeguard the acceptance of cash and preserve good 
access to cash services, as well as ensure the security and sustainability of 
banknotes. Growing concerns across the euro area about cash acceptance and 
access to cash services highlight the urgent need for a comprehensive EU 
framework with clear and binding rules on the legal tender status of euro banknotes 
and coins. Such a framework will strengthen public trust in cash and clarify Member 
States’ responsibilities in terms of ensuring effective access to and greater resilience 
of cash services. The ECB welcomed the significant progress achieved by the EU 
legislators, with the Council of the European Union’s December 2025 agreement on 
a general approach, and stands ready to provide technical support for the finalisation 
of the Regulation on the tender of euro banknotes and coins71 as part of the Single 
Currency Package. Notwithstanding the general rise in digital retail payments in the 
euro area, analyses of electricity blackouts show that cash remains a reliable 
fallback in the event of disruptions to the payment system, which can occur 
unexpectedly and affect transactions on a wide scale.72 Cash bolsters systemic 
resilience, both acting (additionally to its daily widespread use) as a “spare tyre” for 
the payment system during disruptions and fostering competition in payment 
markets. It is also important for financial inclusion since many citizens, not least 
vulnerable groups, rely on cash to make their daily payments.

Cash plays an important 
contingency role, supporting the 
resilience of the payment system

In 2025, 14 counterfeits were detected per million genuine banknotes in circulation, 
which is one of the lowest levels observed since the launch of the euro (Chart 6.2). 
The likelihood of receiving a counterfeit banknote is therefore very small.

Most counterfeits are of low quality with no or only very poor imitations of security 
features. Banknotes can be checked using the simple “feel, look and tilt” method 
described on the banknote security features web page and on the websites of the 
euro area NCBs.

During 2025 the ECB proceeded with its work on redesigning the euro banknotes. 
The aim of the process is that the new banknotes better reflect Europe’s unity, 
identity and values, and are more secure, environmentally friendly and relatable to all 
Europeans. Launched in December 2021, this project highlights the ECB’s 
commitment to cash as a safe and inclusive payment method.

Public involvement has been crucial in the redesign process. Through consultations 
and surveys, the ECB has gathered ideas and feedback from across the European 
Union. In 2023, based on public input and expert recommendations, the Governing 
Council selected two themes for the new banknotes: “European culture”, celebrating 
shared cultural spaces and iconic European personalities; and “Rivers and birds”, 
showcasing Europe’s rich natural diversity. In early 2025 it selected the motifs to 
illustrate each theme.

The public is being consulted 
throughout the redesign process, 
and a decision on the final designs 
is expected around the end of 2026

Later in the year, on 15 July, the ECB launched its design contest for the new 
banknotes, inviting designers and artists residing in the European Union to submit 
applications to participate in the design phase. Participants were selected based on 
their experience and achievements, and have now started preparing design 
proposals. The Design Contest Jury, made up of independent experts from each 
euro area country, will select up to five winning designs for each theme. The public 
will have the opportunity to share its views before the Governing Council selects the 
final designs, which is expected around the end of 2026. The new banknotes will 
enter circulation some years after this decision and following the production process.