RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK 
 
Malaysia’s economy overcame a weak start to the 
year and GDP grew by 4.7 percent in 2013. The 
economy expanded vigorously in the last three 
quarters of the year after a soft patch early on. This 
better-than-expected performance was mainly due 
to a recovery in exports: after contracting in 2012 
and the first half of 2013 (-1.8 and -3.9 percent), 
exports expanded by 5.2 percent in the second half. 
This offset weaker domestic demand. 
As the 
Government 
implemented 
fiscal 
and 
credit 
tightening measures, domestic demand growth 
decelerated from 7.3 percent in the first half to 5.5 
percent in the second half of 2013. 
 
Better export performance led to a higher current 
account surplus. The recovery in exports was broad-
based, including the long-ailing electrical and 
electronics (E&E) sector. The current account surplus 
hit a 15-year low of 0.8 percent of GDP in mid-2013, 
before improving to 7.9 percent in early 2014. This 
partly offset negative flows of 14.9 percent of GDP in 
the financial account in the first quarter. Global 
portfolio reallocation led to outflows in the financial 
account for the three quarters through March 2014. 
 
Growth slowed in early 2014, but the outlook remains 
favorable given the positive external backdrop. Due 
to base effects, GDP is expected to grow by 5.4 
percent and 4.6 percent in 2014 and 2015, 
respectively. The outlook for 2014 and 2015 will 
benefit 
from 
better 
conditions 
in 
advanced 
economies. Domestic demand faces headwinds: (1) 
subsidy cuts, tax hikes and public wage restraint in 
pursuit of fiscal consolidation; (2) likely higher interest 
rates as global monetary conditions normalize; and 
(3) the resulting pressures on household budgets. With 
foreign demand absorbing more than half of 
domestic value-added, a better external outlook 
outweighs domestic headwinds. 
 
Investments and imports of capital goods will remain 
robust as large projects move forward. Improved 
global 
conditions 
and 
the 
approval 
of 
the 
Pengerang Integrated Complex will result in further 
growth in investments – as well as growth in capital 
goods imports. The latter will keep the current 
account surplus at modest levels (4.4-4.6 percent of 
GDP in 2014 and 2015) despite the lift in exports.

Medium-term fiscal consolidation remains on track, 
but gets harder. Helped by revenues from asset sales 
and large underspending of the capital budget, the 
Government bettered its deficit target of 4.0 percent 
of GDP despite overspending in subsidies and weak 
income tax collections. As a result, the debt-to-GDP 
ratio stabilized just below 55 percent. With domestic 
activity 
moderating 
and 
revenue 
growth 
constrained, spending measures towards further 
reducing the subsidy bill and capping emolument 
growth are needed for the Government to meet its 
2014 deficit target of 3.5 percent of GDP. 
 
The central bank has signaled that it may have to 
tighten policy to avoid the build-up of financial 
imbalances. So far BNM has been managing risks to 
macroeconomic stability primarily through macro-
prudential regulations. Although such efforts have 
borne fruit (credit growth continued to decelerate), 
there is concern that household debt has continued 
to climb, reaching 86.5 percent in 2013, and that the 
real interest rate has become negative as inflation 
picked up to 3.7 percent in the first four months of 
2014 largely on increases to administered prices. 
 
Healthy labor markets provide respite for households. 
Higher employment levels (the employment-to-
population ratio increased 3.0 percentage points in 
2013), real wage gains in manufacturing (up 4.7 
percent in 2013), and the full implementation of the 
minimum wage of RM900 in peninsular Malaysia and 
RM800 in Sabah and Sarawak suggest higher labor 
incomes in the economy. Labor force participation 
and employment came down from a peak, but 
settled at a higher level likely due to participation by 
women. 
 
External risks to the outlook have receded, but not 
disappeared. The high share of Malaysia’s debt held 
by foreigners means that volatility in international 
capital markets would be disruptive. 
 
The delicate balancing act of tightening fiscal and 
monetary policies and Malaysia’s ability to leverage 
the improved global environment are key domestic 
risks. While necessary to rebuild buffers, policy 
adjustments 
carry 
risks 
of 
inducing 
excessive 
retrenchment 
in 
household 
spending. 
Boosting 
exports to fully leverage on the improved external 
environment is thus critical for sustained growth.

in Malaysia source less than 40 percent of their inputs 
from domestic firms compared to 46 percent in 
Vietnam and 82 percent in China. 
 
Exports of services have also lagged and remain an 
area of significant potential. Malaysia has few 
services-exporting firms and at 12 percent of GDP 
services exports are below what would be expected 
for a country at its level of income. 
 
‘Behind the borders’ restrictions hinders export growth 
and limits linkages between domestic providers and 
export-oriented industries. Although the Government 
has recently embarked on a liberalization of services 
sectors, 
many 
are 
still 
relatively 
restrictive 
as 
measured by the World Bank’s Services Trade 
Restrictiveness index and assessment of the burden of 
non-tariff 
measures. 
Professional 
and 
transport 
services are more restrictive on average than most 
countries in East Asia for example. A restrictive 
domestic 
environment 
reduces 
incentives 
for 
exporting, and for exporting firms to buy more 
domestic value-added. Barriers are not limited to 
ownership restrictions, but extend to licensing and 
regulations that limit domestic competition. 
 
Engaging in higher value-added tasks in global value 
chains will also require addressing skills gaps. As 
energy prices have increased, so has the value of 
related assets. Thus it became relatively attractive for 
investors to come into the petrochemical sector. 
Meanwhile, as Malaysia grew, the availability of low-
cost labor dwindled, especially in comparison with 
neighboring countries. At the same time, skills 
mismatches remain an obstacle for firms looking to 
scale up higher value-added activities. 
 
Malaysia’s upcoming chairmanship in ASEAN offers 
three 
concrete 
avenues 
to 
boost 
trade 
competitiveness. First, Malaysia can deepen its 
liberalization efforts in services by achieving a 
commitment of ASEAN members to classify and 
disclose their ‘behind-the-border’ restrictions on 
services trade; Malaysia could take the lead and 
implement such classification and disclosure as part 
of its own autonomous liberalization of services. 
Second, Malaysia can pursue mutual recognition 
agreements for professionals, both to create more 
competition but also to meet short-term skills gaps. 
Third, Malaysia can lead in streamlining non-tariff 
measures by reviewing domestic regulations such as 
licensing requirements affecting firms potentially 
linked to global value chains.

The current account remains in a small surplus

Trade drives more than half of Malaysia’s economy

Trade as a share of GDP has declined sharply

Limited linkages in E&E prevent higher value-addition

Services exports have not reached their potential

Non-tariff costs are high in ASEAN – including in Malaysia

1. Recent Economic Developments and Outlook 
 
Growth robust, with some moderation into 2014

1. After a solid performance in the last three quarters of 2013, growth moderated into 2014. In the fourth quarter of 
2013, Malaysia’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 7.6 percent (quarter-on-quarter, seasonally adjusted 
annualized rate – q/q saar), representing further acceleration of growth from the 6.8 and 7.1 percent rates recorded 
in the second and third quarters, respectively (Figure 1)1. This brought year-on-year (y/y) real GDP growth to 4.7 
percent, slightly above the World Bank’s previous forecast of 4.5 percent. Growth decelerated in the first quarter of 
2014 as export growth cooled somewhat. Across East Asia, the performance of the Malaysian economy followed a 
pattern seen in most other regional economies where a slowdown in exports, possibly linked to the US weather-
induced slowdown in the quarter, led to deceleration in early 2014 (see Figure 2).

2. Revitalized exports of high-technology goods helped lift growth in recent quarters. A recovery in exports in the 
second half of the year supported GDP growth: the contribution of net exports was less negative at -1.1 pp in 2013 
(2012: -4.0 pp). Of the 2.9 pp change, 2.4 pp came from better exports, which after several quarters as a drag on 
growth, has expanded sequentially since the third quarter of 2013. Export growth turned around from -3.9 percent in 
the first half of 2013 to 5.2 percent in the second half (y/y), partly due to higher shipments of high-technology 
products and partly due to a stabilization of commodity exports (Figure 3). Exports of E&E products expanded by 7.7 
and 5.2 percent from the previous year in the last quarter of 2013 and first quarter of 2014, respectively (US dollar 
terms). This performance was driven by three main factors: most importantly, better growth prospects in advanced 
economies increased demand for Malaysian high-tech exports, which represent a higher share of trade to those 
regions; second, the political crisis in Thailand may have, at the margin, led MNCs with spare capacity in both 
countries to favor accelerating production in Malaysia; and finally, though growth in emerging markets slowed 
(especially in early 2014), commodity-related exports stabilized after declining through most of 2013.

3. High-tech exports benefited from economic recovery in advanced economies. The recovery in high-income 
economies remains on track. The US economy expanded robustly in late 2013 and despite a bumpy start to 2014 due 
to weather-related factors, labor and housing markets continue to improve. Growth in the EU remains below pre-crisis 
levels, but has stabilized; in Japan, the economy has now expanded for six consecutive quarters. In all these 
economies, still-loose monetary policies, reduced drag from fiscal consolidation, improving labor market conditions, a 
steady release of pent-up demand and improved financial market conditions have supported growth. The improved 
demand environment in advanced economies led to a pick-up in exports of Malaysian high-tech products in the 
second half of 2013 (Figure 4). Despite the contraction in the US economy, exports to advanced economies 
continued to expand into the first quarter of 2014, with strong growth of high-tech exports to the EU and Japan. 
Commodity exports were weaker across high-income economies, especially the US, where weak commodity exports 
in 2013 likely reflect the expansion of domestic energy sources in the country.

Source: CEIC and World Bank staff calculations 
Notes: 1. “Commodity-related” includes food and live animals; 
beverages and tobacco; inedible crude materials; mineral fuels; 
animal and vegetable fats and oils; and chemicals. High-tech is 
approximated by machinery and transport equipment 
 2. Exports to the EU approximated by exports to the U.K., 
France, Germany and Netherlands 
 
4. The political crisis in Thailand may, at the margin, have contributed to the pick-up in Malaysia’s E&E exports. Many 
firms in the electronics global value chain have capacity to produce similar products in multiple countries for reasons 
of risk management and competition (intra-firm and inter-jurisdictional, with respect to tax incentives for example). 
According to JETRO (2013), 43 percent of Japanese companies in Thailand, and 48 percent of Japanese companies 
in Malaysia have alternative productive capacity in other countries. Such overlap between Thailand and Malaysia – 
and consequent potential for substitution – is unlikely to be extensive, as seen by the very modest pick-up in 
Malaysian E&E exports around the time of the Thai floods. Nevertheless, Figure 5 shows that the recovery of Malaysia’s 
E&E exports does coincide with a sharp dip in Thai E&E exports following an earlier period of expansion. 
 
5. Growth in emerging economies decelerated in early 2014, tempering somewhat Malaysia’s export recovery. 
Growth in (gross) exports of goods and services, which averaged 12.1 percent (q/q saar) in the third and fourth 
quarters of 2013, slowed to 6.1 percent in the first quarter of 2014. This is partly due to slower growth in emerging 
economies, notably China. Chinese GDP expanded by 5.7 percent (q/q saar; see Figure 2) in the first quarter of 2014, 
the slowest pace in over two years. Although exports to China held up well due to large energy exports between 
December and February, the slowdown in emerging economies more broadly helps explain why Malaysia’s exports

expanded more slowly in the first quarter despite improvements across G3 economies (Figure 6). Moreover, this slower 
growth is likely linked to weakness in commodity prices, which remain by and large below their 2012 levels (Figure 7).

Source: World Bank DECPG 
Source: CEIC, DOSM, and World Bank staff calculations 
 
6. Exports of petroleum-related products have been a steady contributor to export growth. Growth in exports of 
processed commodities has been largely due to chemicals and petroleum products (Figure 8). The value of exports 
from the petrochemical industry expanded by an average of 16 percent per year in US dollar terms over the past 
three years. Some of these exports reflect higher domestic production, but some reflect the construction of large 
storage facilities used for re-export: imports of petroleum products have grown by 27 percent per year on average in 
volume terms. Exports of crude petroleum and natural gas have expanded in 2014 after little growth the previous 
year, reflecting stable prices and output. The value of rubber and palm oil exports has declined over the past year. In 
the case of rubber, this is largely driven by a significant decline in prices (down by 17 percent in 2013 and a further 21

percent in 2014 through May see Figure 7). In the case of palm oil, prices declined in 2013 (by 14 percent) and 
volumes were flat. Prices recovered in 2014 but volumes came down, keeping growth in negative territory. 
 
Domestic demand still expanding, but headwinds start to weigh

7. Domestic demand remained strong, especially in early 2014, when it was supported by expansion in private 
investment and government consumption. Domestic demand (GDP less net exports) contributed 5.8 percentage 
points to annual growth in 2013 (2012: 9.6 pp) and 4.9 percentage points in the first quarter of 2014 (but inventories 
subtracted 1.8 pp in 1Q 2014 vs. 0.9 pp in 2013). Government consumption surprised on the upside, rising by 23.2 
percent (q/q saar) after two quarters of contraction; had government consumption been flat, quarterly GDP growth 
would have been nearly zero. The value-added produced in Malaysia and consumed domestically (World Bank 
estimate) expanded by 8.8 percent in 2013 (2012: 9.3 percent); this measure of domestic demand decelerated in the 
fourth quarter, but picked up again in 2014 thanks to a spike in government consumption and fixed investments 
(+12.4 percent q/q saar). The strength in domestic demand correlates with the continued acceleration in 
domestically-oriented sectors, especially services, which contributed more than half of total GDP growth for the 
quarter (3.5 pp, 2013: 3.1 pp), and construction, which expanded 53.5 percent (q/q saar) from the previous quarter 
and contributed 0.7 pp to year-on-year growth. Within services, the largest contributions to growth came from the 
retail sector (1.2 pp), government services (0.6 pp), and real estate and business services (0.5pp). 
 
8. Household consumption kept expanding in the face of tighter credit and fiscal conditions. Softer commodities 
prices (and attendant implications for smallholder households), the fuel subsidy rationalization implemented in 
September 2013, lower bonuses to civil servants and macro-prudential measures aimed at moderating household 
credit growth tempered private consumption growth somewhat in 2013 (+7.2 percent vs. +8.2 percent in 2012, y/y), 
especially in the fourth quarter (-0.8 percent q/q saar). But private consumption picked up again in early 2014 (+6.8 
percent q/q saar) as public consumption expanded, labor markets remained robust and credit growth, while 
somewhat slower, remained buoyant. Government consumption climbed 6.3 percent in 2013 despite contracting in 
the third and fourth quarters (-9.5 and -3.4 percent q/q saar), respectively, as the Government cut spending on 
bonuses for civil servants and supplies and services. Public consumption then spiked in early 2014 (+23.3 percent 
SAAR), however. Overall consumption remains a key driver of growth (Figure 9): consumption of domestic value-
added (World Bank estimate) expanded by 7.4 percent in 2013 and by 7.5 percent (y/y) in the first quarter of 2014, 
contributing 4.0 percentage points to year-on-year growth rates in both periods.

9. The high pace of investment moderated as public investment slowed. Public investment grew by just 2.2 percent in 
2013 (2012: 14.6 percent) and contracted in the previous two quarters (Q4 2013: -8.1 percent; Q1 2014: -4.0 percent, 
q/q saar, World Bank estimate) on slower investments by Non-Financial Public Enterprises (NFPEs) and sluggish 
disbursements of the capital budget. Since many NFPE projects are already underway and some have been 
completed (such as the LNG regasification terminal in Malacca), tapering of NFPE investment growth was expected. 
Private fixed investment also slowed, but still posted double-digit growth (+13.1 percent; 2012: +22.8 percent). Private 
fixed investments continued to decelerate in early 2014 (+6.9 percent q/q saar, World Bank estimate). Overall, gross 
fixed capital formation expanded by 8.5 percent in 2013 (2012: +19.2 percent) before slowing in early 2014. Growth 
was mainly supported by sustained momentum in the construction sector, which expanded by 10.9 percent from the 
previous year, a rate similar to construction investment (11.0 percent). The share of investment to GDP, which climbed 
quickly in 2012, stabilized at about 27 percent in late 2013 and early 2014, about 5 percentage points higher than the 
rate in the previous decade (Figure 10). 
 
Strong labor markets support household consumption

10. Labor markets have been volatile, but generally strong. The labor force participation rate surged by 4.5 
percentage points from September 2012 to a peak of 69.6 percent in September 2013. Meanwhile, unemployment 
remained stable within a narrow range of 3.0 – 3.2 percent (Figure 11). Combined, these two developments reflect 
significant employment gains in 2013: the economy added 948,200 jobs between December 2012 and December 
2013 and the ratio of employed persons to the working-age population climbed 3 percentage points to 67 percent. 
However, the economy shed 182,000 jobs in the first three months of 2014, as the labor force participation rate 
retreated2. The manufacturing sector made a small contribution, adding over 12,000 jobs in 2013 despite a small 
decline in E&E employment. E&E employment turned around in early 2014 along with the pick-up in activity of the E&E 
industry (Figure 12). While manufacturing wage growth slowed in early 2014, E&E wage growth accelerated as the 
industry offered higher salaries to attract workers; it added over 3,000 jobs (changes in average employment in the 
first quarter of 2014 compared to 2013) after several months retrenching.

2 It should be noted that the labor force participation rate (LFP) is also subject to seasonal fluctuations and therefore month-to-
month comparisons may not be meaningful. Comparing March 2014 to March 2013 reveals that the LFP was still 1.4 percentage 
points higher than the previous year, though this represents a significantly lower increase in the LFP when comparing with the year-
on-year increase registered in September 2013.

11. There are indications that real wages have increased. Real average manufacturing wages expanded by 4.9 
percent in 2013, while real wages in wholesale, retail and repair of motor vehicles rose by 6.1 percent. These wage 
gains have exceeded real productivity growth. Real output per worker in manufacturing expanded by 4.1 percent, 
while that in wholesale, retail and motor vehicles expanded by 5.4 percent – in both cases, below the level of wage 
gains. This may be related to the introduction of a minimum wage, but also reflects tight labor markets in aggregate. 
Buoyant economic activity boosts labor demand, forcing firms to bid up wages, which in turn provide incentives for 
more workers to join the labor force. The result for the economy is one of higher household incomes as more 
household members are working, and on average earning more. 
 
Inflation up on higher administered prices but few signs of second-round effects

12. Considering the backdrop of tight labor markets, vigorous domestic demand, and higher energy and tobacco 
prices from subsidy cuts and tax hikes, inflation picked up only modestly in late 2013 and early 2014. Consumer price 
inflation accelerated from an average of 1.7 percent for the first eight months of 2013 to 2.8 percent in the last four 
months of 2013, climbing further to average 3.4 percent in the first five months of 2014. While the overall inflation rate 
is similar in Peninsular Malaysia and Sarawak, prices in Sabah have been rising more slowly, averaging only 2.3 
percent in the first five months of 2014. Energy prices increased due to cuts to RON 95 and diesel fuel subsidies, which 
resulted in RM0.20 hikes in oil prices in September, as well as electricity price hikes between 15 and 17 percent 
effective in January, and higher natural gas prices to the non-power sector in the second quarter of 2014. Food 
inflation averaged 3.9 percent in the first five months of 2014 in tandem with a small increase in global food prices 
(see Figure 7). Excluding food, beverages and energy, “core” inflation increased by only 2.1 percent between 
January and May of 2014, a modest acceleration from the 1.1 percent average recorded in 2013. The producer price 
index, which had been negative for the past sixteen months finally turned positive in October likely due to the 
increase in diesel prices but levels remain moderate at 3.5 percent in April.

13. Inflationary pressures have been building but remain mild thanks to increased capacity. Concerns that higher 
administered prices may have second-round effects on inflation are intensified by pressure from demand-side factors 
(Figure 13). On the other hand, credit growth has decelerated and capacity utilization in domestic industries has 
come down despite the positive output gap, suggesting that the recent surge in investments may have increased 
domestic capacity and raised potential output. Services inflation – which may be expected to reflect labor market 
pressures on prices – has increased, but at 3.1 percent in May it remains moderate. Supply conditions have shifted 
from benign to neutral. On the one hand, oil prices have been stable (Figure 7), but global food prices have

increased in 2014 (though the year-on-year change is still negative), and producer prices across East Asia largely 
reversed their disinflationary trend due to higher energy prices (Figure 14). 
 
Fiscal and monetary policies gradually becoming less accommodative

14. The Government outperformed its deficit target for 2013 as additional non-tax collections offset higher 
expenditures on subsidies. Operating (current) expenditures exceeded their budgeted 2013 allocations by RM 9.4 
billion (4.6 percent) and tax collections came in lower than budgeted by RM3.2 billion (2.0 percent). Nevertheless, the 
Government managed to slightly exceed its 2013 target for the overall federal government deficit (4.0 percent of 
GDP), posting a deficit of 3.9 percent for the year. This was achieved through lower-than-budgeted disbursements of 
development expenditures (RM 6.0 billion) and additional non-tax revenues (RM 7.9 billion; see Figure 15). 
 
15. After several years exceeding targets, tax revenues came in lower than expected in 2013. This was primarily due 
to weakness in collection of personal income tax, which increased by just 0.3 percent in 2013 from the previous year 
(2012: +13.7 percent). Collection of indirect taxes also came in below target. Oil-related revenues came in line with 
expectations, with PETRONAS’ dividend as budgeted, PITA and export duties somewhat lower, and petroleum 
royalties somewhat higher than originally expected. Oil-related revenues accounted for 31.2 percent of total revenue 
in 2013 compared to 33.7 percent in 2012. Corporate income taxes continued to demonstrate positive buoyancy3, 
growing at a rate of 13.4 percent (2012: +9.4 percent) compared to 4.8 percent for nominal GDP. Despite the weak 
performance in personal income taxes in 2013, at 8.2 percent of GDP, personal and corporate income taxes 
continue to rise (2012: 7.9 percent) and are now closer to 2001-2002 levels of 8.6-9.0 percent of GDP.

Source: CEIC, MOF and World Bank staff calculations 
Note: ‘Personnel’ includes emoluments, pensions and gratuities 
 
16. A reduction in the growth of personnel spending partly offset significant slippages in subsidies, resulting in overall 
deceleration in operating expenditures. The expansion in current expenditures came in at a modest 2.8 percent in 
2013 compared to 12.6 percent in 2012, with much of the change due to a sharp deceleration in personnel spending. 
After growing an average 12.6 percent per year between 2000 and 2012, emoluments rose by only 1.6 percent in 
2013, the lowest annual growth rate in the past 10 years, supported also by lower bonuses given to civil servants. 
Expenditures on emoluments, gratuities and pensions continued to exceed original budget allocations, but this is 
expected to be at a more modest 5 percent in 2013 compared to an average of 10 percent between 2005 and 2012

(Figure 16). These trends however, belay significant slippages in subsidies. Notwithstanding a slight decline in crude oil 
prices and the fuel subsidy rationalization in September, which is estimated to have saved the government RM1.1 
billion, subsidies (including fuel subsidies and BR1M) are expected to exceed budget allocations by 15 percent.4, 
 
17. Disbursements from the development budget shrank further. Development expenditures came in RM6.0 billion 
(11.6 percent) under budget, falling for the third consecutive year (2013: -8.2 percent; 2012: -2.2 percent). This likely 
was a major drag on public investment growth (+3.1 percent in 2013 in nominal terms) as investments by the 30 
largest NFPEs were projected to increase by 50 percent in 2013. PETRONAS alone expanded investment (in nominal 
terms) by 25.7 percent to an estimated 5.7 percent of GDP in 2013, of which about 50-60 percent would be domestic 
investments. On the other hand, major investment projects such as the MRT as well as investments in independent 
power producers have been undertaken on a public-private partnership basis. Some of these projects are partially 
financed by government-guaranteed debt, which climbed to 15.9 percent of GDP at end-2013, from 15.2 percent in 
2012 and 9.0 percent in 2008. 
 
18. Monetary policy has remained supportive of growth. Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) has kept its benchmark interest 
rate (the overnight policy rate, OPR) unchanged at 3.0 percent for over three years now, 50 bps lower than the rate 
that prevailed between 2006 and 2008. The holding pattern has been driven by counter-balancing forces. On the 
one hand, domestic demand growth has been robust over the past three years, the output gap has closed, wages 
seem to be rising, administered prices have started to increase and credit growth remains robust. Against these 
incipient demand-side forces, global interest rates remain low, the global environment has been weak until very 
recently, justifying domestic stimulus, and credit growth has been responding to macro-prudential measures. 
Importantly, inflation has been low and even recent pressures from hikes of administered prices have been mild. 
 
Financial sector performance suggests stabilization in domestic demand

21. Impaired loans remain low, and banks are well-capitalized, mitigating the risk from buoyant credit growth. As of 
end-April 2014, the Malaysian banking sector remained well capitalized, with the Tier 1 capital ratio at 13.0 percent 
and total capital ratio at 14.7 percent, above levels required by national authorities and Basel III standards. Tier 1 
capital comprised 88.4 percent of total capital. Asset quality was stable with the ratio of non-performing loans 
holding steady at 1.3 percent as of April 2014, similar to the ratio at end-April 2013. The volume of impaired loans 
actually contracted by 0.5 percent in April from the previous year, suggesting an improvement in the quality of assets 
in the banking sector. 
 
Figure 17. Growth in working capital loans picked up 
again in 2014

22. Better export performance led to an improvement in Malaysia’s current account. Malaysia’s current account 
surplus declined from 15.5 percent of GDP in 2009 to 0.8 percent of GDP in the second quarter of 2013 (Figure 19). For 
2013 as a whole, the current account posted a surplus of 4.0 percent of GDP, the lowest level in 15 years. This trend is 
linked both to the strength in productive domestic investments, which led to a surge in imports of capital goods, 
construction services and minerals for storage, but also to the weakness in exports of both goods and services. 
Accordingly, the improved export performance in the previous three quarters helped lift the current account to 7.9 
percent of GDP for the first quarter of 2014. Figure 20 points to two proximate causes of this performance: first, the 
non-commodity balance recently improved thanks to a recovery in E&E exports and lower investment growth; and 
second, the decline in the commodity balance moderated on higher exports of crude oil in recent months. 
 
23. Portfolio outflows led to a negative balance in the financial account. Portfolio flows turned negative following 
signals from the US Federal Reserve in mid-2013 that it was getting ready to gradually reduce monetary 
accommodation. Foreign investors, who held 29 percent of Malaysian government securities as of March 2013, 
reduced their holdings as they rebalanced their portfolios (September 2013: 26 percent; March 2014: 27 percent). 
Outflows were also seen in equity markets, and were most pronounced in the third quarter of 2013 and first quarter of 
2014; flows turned positive again in the second quarter of 2014 (Figure 21). Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Malaysia 
has averaged 3.7 percent of GDP in the past four quarters, slightly above the pre-crisis (2002-2007) average of 3.5 
percent of GDP. Direct investment abroad contracted by 17.5 percent in 2013 (y/y) due to a lumpy investment in late 
2012 (PETRONAS’ USD 6 billion investment in Progress Energy in Canada). As a result, net FDI turned slightly positive (0.8 
percent of GDP) in the past three quarters. Given increasing outflows in the three quarters through March 2014 the 
financial account posted a deficit of RM15.8 billion in 2013 (1.6 percent of yearly GDP, of which 21.4 billion in the 
second half) and RM 37.6 billion (14.9 percent of quarterly GDP) in the first quarter of 2014 (Figure 22).

Source: CEIC, MIDF and World Bank staff calculations 
Source: CEIC and World Bank staff calculations 
 
24. Net capital flows were negative in the previous two quarters, implying a decline in international reserves. The 
improvement in the current account only partly compensated for outflows in the financial account and errors and 
omissions, leading to overall capital outflows. As in previous episodes of volatility, BNM accommodated outflows first 
out of reductions in the net forward position and other foreign currency assets6 before drawing on official reserve 
assets (Figure 23). Net official international reserves stand at USD 130.9 billion as of May 30, 2014. This level of reserves is 
sufficient to finance over 9.1 months of retained imports7 and is 1.3 times the short-term external debt. Given

Malaysia’s flexible exchange rate regime, outflows led to a nominal depreciation of the Ringgit in mid-2013 (Figure 
24), which helped limit the extent of reserve depletion (reserves in fact remained steady in local currency terms).

External demand will support growth in the near term

25. Malaysia’s economic performance in 2014 and 2015 is projected to reflect a relative switch from domestic to 
external sources of growth. The outlook for the Malaysian economy is underpinned by two opposing trends: (i) a 
continued improvement in the external environment as the recovery in advanced economies takes hold and 
generates demand for emerging market exports, and (ii) tighter domestic conditions as policy makers at home and 
abroad respond to improvements by gradually withdrawing fiscal and monetary policy support. Tightening fiscal and 
monetary policie in the course of 2014 and 2015 are likely to dampen household consumption and investments. The 
combined contribution of fixed investments and consumption is expected to decline from 6.8 percentage points in 
2013 to 5.7pp in 2014 and 5.3pp in 2015. On the other hand, as the global recovery continues to build momentum, 
net exports become less of a drag on growth. In 2014, the low base, higher export growth and the rebuilding of 
inventories that were depleted in 2013 leads growth to accelerate to 5.4 percent. The high base of 2014 leads to a 
slowdown in 2015, although quarterly growth is expected to accelerate from an average of 3.8 percent (q/q saar) in 
2014 to 5.4 percent in 2015. Growth is expected to normalize by 2016 with higher contributions from final consumption. 
Table 1 and Table 2 present a summary of the forecasts. 
 
Global recovery to remain on firm footing despite slowing growth in China

26. The ‘old normal’ of narrower growth differentials between advanced and emerging economies looks set to return 
in 2014 – 2016. Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) in the advanced economies have been generally in growth 
territory since mid-2013, and remained there into 2014, although at a declining pace. In the Euro area, GDP is 
expected to grow by 1.1 percent in 2014 and 1.7 percent in 2015 (2013: -0.4 percent).8 Meanwhile, the outlook is also 
favorable for the US (+2.1 percent in 2014 and +3.0 percent in 2015 vs. 1.9 percent in 2013) and Japan (+1.3 percent 
for 2014 and 2015 vs. +0.5 percent average for 2002-2007). Growth in emerging economies, especially China, is 
expected to moderate from recent peaks. China’s PMI has diverged from the PMIs in G3 economies (Figure 25), and 
despite recently-enacted supportive measures, growth is expected to slow down to 7.6 percent in 2014 and 7.5

percent in 2015 (+11.6 percent in 2003-07). Prospects in the large ASEAN economies are also not bright and as a 
result, the difference in average growth rate between developing and advanced economies is expected to narrow 
to 2.9 percentage points (pp) in 2014 and 3.0 pp in 2015, compared to 4.3 pp in 2011. Given the relative size of 
advanced economies, these developments are likely to provide a net boost to global import demand and present 
opportunities for an export-oriented economy like Malaysia (see Box 1 for more details).

Source: CEIC, World Bank Development Prospects Group and 
World Bank staff calculations 
Note: World Bank forecasts as of June 2013 
 
27. Export growth is expected to pick up momentum into 2014 and 2015. Export growth will be driven by higher energy 
commodity and petrochemical production, as new investments start to come online. A continued pick-up in E&E 
demand, as suggested by the Singapore electronics PMI (which remains on an expansionary mode, albeit weakly) 
and the recent response of Malaysia’s E&E sector to improved demand conditions (perhaps aided by continued 
political uncertainty in Thailand) will make a substantial contribution. Based on a relatively favorable outlook for the 
global economy and gradual pick up in the output of energy commodities and E&E, Malaysia’s exports are 
projected to expand by 6.3 percent in real terms 2014 and 6.2 percent in 2015. These rates are below Malaysia’s pre-
crisis averages of 7.6 percent export growth but above expected growth in global trade volumes, especially in 2014

due to the low base in 2013 (Figure 26). The negative contribution from net exports will continue in 2014-2016 but will 
narrow considerably (-0.4, -0.8 and -1.0 percentage points respectively).

are there effects on growth in East Asia? 
 
Slower growth in China as it deleverages and rebalances its economy has raised concerns that developing 
countries (especially commodity exporters like Malaysia) will see current accounts balances deteriorate and growth 
slow, due to weaker import demand from China. 
 
While certainly a valid concern, the slowing of Chinese growth unfolds against a backdrop of stronger growth in the 
high income world that, depending on the degree of trade dependence on China and type of trade, will offset the 
trade headwinds coming from China. Indeed, strengthening high-income demand partly explained the surge in 
developing country merchandise exports which rose at a 19 percent annualized pace in the final quarter of 2013, 
bolstering end-year GDP growth in a number of economies, including Malaysia. Momentum has eased since then, 
reflecting weakness in China and weather disruptions in the US, but should recover as these economies re-
accelerate — to the benefit of developing economies with close trade linkages to the US and Euro Area. 
 
On balance, rising high income demand should more than compensate for slowing Chinese import demand. Model 
simulations indicate that in response to a 1 percentage point increase in high income growth and a corresponding 
slowdown in China, growth rises by 0.24 percentage points in developing countries (excluding China), 0.22 
percentage points in East Asia (ex-China) and 0.29 percentage points in Latin America and the Caribbean region. 
 
Commodity exporters, notably metals exporters, benefit somewhat less due to China’s large demand share in 
global metals markets. More generally, fears of Chinese growth’s influence on developing country growth may be 
overblown. Slower growth in China in the post-crisis period had a negligible impact on the rest of East Asia, despite 
China being a major client for the region’s commodities, and its intermediate and final goods. Although average 
Chinese growth fell from 11.6 percent in the period 2003-07 to 9.7 percent in the post-crisis period, growth in the rest 
of the region remained broadly stable and robust at around 5.5 percent. 
 
Firms in the region have been able to leverage their underlying competitiveness and expanding supply potential to 
find other markets to offset the slower demand growth coming from China — in much the same way as growth in 
developing countries accelerated between 1995 and 2007 — even as growth in high-income countries was slowing 
(World Bank, 2012a). 
 
Source: Excerpted from World Bank (2014). 
 
 
Headwinds on domestic demand to pick up

28. Several factors will create a drag on domestic demand and private consumption in particular. First, fiscal 
consolidation is expected to continue in earnest in 2014. Second, while tapering may be linked to a boost to the 
external sector (which in turn may spill-over to domestic sectors), the direct impact of higher interest rates or a weaker 
currency on both consumption and investment would be negative. Third, commodity prices are unlikely to make 
significant gains for a third year, impacting spending by agricultural households. Finally, households will be pressed to 
maintain the spending growth of recent years in the face of higher debt servicing costs and hikes in administered 
prices. Notwithstanding the headwinds, labor market conditions remain strong, and the Government is expected 
continue to provide cash transfers in lieu of subsidies, which would partially offset the impact of subsidy cuts on 
consumption. Consumption is expected to moderate accordingly and growth is expected to moderate from 7.2 
percent in 2013 to 6.5 percent in 2014 (2015: +5.6 percent; 2016: 6.6 percent), before picking up to 7.2 percent in 
2015. Growth in government consumption is expected to moderate significantly due to fiscal consolidation, from 6.3 
percent in 2013 to 2.9 percent in 2014 and 3.0 percent in 2015 (2016: +5.2 percent).

29. Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) will continue to grow faster than GDP, but at a slowing rate. Given 
expectations of improvement in the global environment in 2014 as well as the significant pipeline of investment 
projects led by PETRONAS’ Pengerang Integrated Complex (PIC) in Southern Johor, GFCF should continue to make 
an important contribution to growth9. Nevertheless, some dampening of the momentum is expected given the high 
base effect as well as the impact of tapering, higher global interest rates, and fiscal consolidation, which may also 
revive talks of sequencing certain investments with high import content. Real gross fixed capital formation is expected 
to decelerate from 8.5 percent in 2013 to 7.4 percent in 2014 (2015: +7.0 percent; 2016: +6.4 percent). As GFCF 
growth is expected to remain above GDP growth in the medium term, the share of investments in GDP is expected to 
climb further from 27.7 percent in 2013 to 29.2 percent of GDP in 2016.

30. Overall, on a year-on-year basis Malaysia is expected to register real GDP growth of 5.4 percent in 2014, 
decelerating due to base effects to 4.6 percent in 2015 before normalizing to 5.0 percent in 2016. The contribution of 
domestic demand will decline as exports pick up. Domestic demand as defined in the national accounts (total 
consumption and investment) is expected to contribute 5.8 and 5.3 percentage points to GDP growth in 2014 and 
2015, down from 9.8 percentage points in 2012 (Table 1). The World Bank’s forecast for 2014 lies 0.3 percentage point 
above the median consensus forecast (as of June; Figure 27) and that for 2015 somewhat below the median 
consensus estimate. On a quarter-on-quarter basis, the forecast assumes a 3.8 percent average annualized growth in 
2014. Headline GDP growth projections have been increased for 2014 compared to those in the December 2013 
Malaysia Economic Monitor due to economic expansion surprising on the upside in the first quarter of 2014 and the 
further improvement in external conditions. 
 
31. Changes in administered prices and the introduction of the GST will lead to a modest pick-up in inflation in 2014 
and 2015. Malaysia’s headline inflation rate is projected to come at around 3.5 percent in 2014 (2013: 2.1 percent), 
moderating to 3.4 percent in 2015 (Figure 28). The forecast for 2014-2015 is higher than the average rate observed 
during the 2002-2007 period (2.2 percent) due to the low base in 2013, strength in domestic demand, hikes in fuel 
prices, electricity tariffs and tobacco taxes, and finally the broader implementation of the minimum wage. These 
factors are tempered by the continuation of benign supply conditions, as indicated by the expectation of stable

commodity prices. Inflation is expected to come at 3.0 percent in 2016, as the base effects from fiscal consolidation 
in 2014 wane. 
 
Fiscal and monetary accommodation to be reduced in 2014 and 2015

32. Fiscal consolidation will have to take place primarily through spending restraint rather than revenue gains. The 
Government reaffirmed its commitment to achieving a budget deficit of 3.5 percent of GDP in 2014 and 3.0 percent 
in 2015. The 2014 targets are premised on realistic projections for moderate revenue growth including a further 
reduction in oil-related revenues. The revenue-to-GDP ratio is in fact projected to decline to 21.2 percent of GDP in 
2014 from 22.1 percent in 2012. Although the GST is likely to provide additional revenues starting in 2015, there is 
limited immediate potential for significant upside, especially with additional tax breaks that are coming online with 
the introduction of GST as well as pressure at that time to delay further adjustments to administered prices. Therefore, 
the reduction in the deficit will need to be achieved through expenditure restraint. 
 
33. Slower growth in emoluments and a reduction in subsidies will be the drivers of consolidation. Spending on 
personnel (wages, pensions and gratuities) is projected to expand by a modest 4.5 percent in 2014. Ensuring that 
spending on emoluments consistently comes close to budgeted allocations, as was the case in 2013, will be critical to 
the consolidation effort and also to build the credibility of the budget. The bulk of the consolidation effort targets 
subsidies. The Government abolished the sugar subsidy, which is expected to save RM 500-600 million in 2014 
compared to 2013. However, most of the contraction in the subsidy bill comes from fuel subsidies. The Government 
has recently announced plans to reduce the volume of subsidized fuel through better targeting of fuel subsidies. 
Further details are required to assess whether to meet the Government’s ambitious targets these measures are 
sufficient without further reductions in the quantum of subsidies.10 
 
34. The introduction of the GST will support consolidation efforts in the medium-term. The main fiscal policy reform 
introduced in the 2014 budget was the announcement that a Goods and Services Tax (GST) would be implemented 
in April 2015 at a rate of 6 percent, with cash transfers expanded to mitigate the impact both of the GST and subsidy 
cuts on lower-income households. GST is expected to eventually broaden the tax base and diversify it from oil-
revenues, ensuring greater buoyancy of revenues in the medium-term.

Figure 29. Despite higher expenditures, the federal 
balance is expected to improve 
 
Balance of the Federal Government, percent of GDP

Figure 30. Debt levels are expected to stabilize in 2014 
 
 
Ratio to GDP, percent

10 The allocation for fuel subsidies has been reduced by 23 percent, but the allocation for BR1M, which is included in the same line as 
fuel subsidies, has been increased by 12 percent on account of the expansion of the program. Therefore, the ‘actual’ spending on 
fuel subsidies needs to contract by RM7.1 billion or 28.6 percent in 2014 in order for the target to be met.

35. As a result of consolidation, debt levels are expected to decline. To signal its commitment to fiscal prudence, the 
Government will continue to make a significant effort to meet its deficit targets. Given continued momentum for 
fiscal consolidation in 2014 and 2015, the deficit is projected to remain on a downward trajectory, though challenges 
in fully implementing subsidy reforms in 2014 and reduced headroom to increase revenues mean that the headline 
deficit could be narrowly missed (Figure 29). Declining deficit levels are expected to lead to a reduction in the ratio of 
federal government debt to GDP from 54.8 to 54.3 percent, while contingent liabilities are expected to continue to 
increase (Figure 30). Long-term fiscal sustainability will require continuing on the path of consolidation, while carefully 
monitoring and managing contingent liabilities and other sources of fiscal risk.11 
 
36. Bank Negara has signaled that it may have to tighten policy to avoid the build-up of financial imbalances. So far 
BNM has been managing risks of financial imbalances primarily through macro-prudential regulations. In 2012 and 
2013, BNM issued guidelines that require financial institutions to assess borrowers based on net rather than gross 
income and, among other things, established a maximum loan tenure of 10 years for personal financing and a 
maximum of 35 years for financing granted for the purchase of residential and non-residential properties, as well as 
the prohibition of pre-approved personal financing products. Although such efforts have borne fruit (credit growth 
continued to decelerate, albeit slowly, in 2013), there is concern that the real interest rate has become negative 
(Figure 31), and that household debt has continued to climb, reaching 86.5 percent in 2013 from 81.3 percent in 2012 
(Figure 32). BNM accordingly noted that “the current monetary and financial conditions could lead to a broader 
build up in economic and financial imbalances. Going forward, the degree of monetary accommodation may need 
to be adjusted to ensure that the risks arising from the accumulation of these imbalances would not undermine the 
growth prospects of the Malaysian economy.” To ensure that future changes in monetary policy stance is adequately 
transmitted to borrowers, BNM has also reformed the interest rate framework, effective January 2015. 
 
Figure 31. Real policy rates turned negative in early 2014

The current account should stabilize at a modest surplus

37. The current account surplus is expected to stabilize above 4 percent of GDP. A recovery in exports accompanied 
by a dampening of domestic demand would lead the current account surplus to stabilize as a percentage of GDP at 
4.4 percent in 2014 and 4.6 percent in 2016 (Figure 33). The current account surpluses in 2014 and 2015 increase only 
slightly despite more moderate investment growth and higher in exports due to lower commodity prices, the 
projection of a positive contribution from inventory investments (much of which are imported parts), and the high 
import content of E&E exports, which are expected to pick up as part of the export recovery.

Figure 33. The current account is expected to remain in 
surplus, albeit a narrowing one 
 
Current account balance, as a percent of GDP

38. The uncertainty about the favorable outlook for the global economy has receded, but the balance of risks 
remains on the downside. Risks have not changed materially in the past six months and include a disorderly exit from 
quantitative easing in advanced economies, substantially slower growth in China and a sharp decline in commodity 
prices. Although the US has started normalizing monetary policy, the EU has recently come up with further monetary 
stimulus to fight deflation, providing at short-term support to global liquidity as well. In addition, Chinese policy makers 
have levers to prevent growth from crossing a lower-bound threshold (which also contributes to stable commodity 
prices). Therefore, while these risks cannot be written off, they appear to have receded for the near term. Domestic 
risks are perhaps more salient and include larger than expected spillovers from fiscal and credit tightening on 
domestic demand as households deleverage, and a failure of export-oriented industries to fully capitalize on 
improved demand conditions due to supply constraints. While Malaysia’s export performance in the past five months 
provides some reassurance with respect to the latter risk, the full impact of fiscal and monetary tightening is yet to be 
seen.

39. Youth unemployment in Malaysia presents a puzzle: if the economy requires increasing numbers of talented 
workers, why does a relatively large share of better-educated youth have trouble finding a job? At 10.2 percent 
(2012), the unemployment rate among 15-24 year-olds in Malaysia is not particularly high when compared to other 
economies (Figure 34). Youth unemployment is also typically higher than the overall unemployment rate (all darker 
bars in Figure 34 are above 1). But in Malaysia the ratio of youth unemployment to overall unemployment appears 
high at 3.3 times and 60 percent of all unemployed workers in Malaysia are between 15 and 24 (Figure 35). Of special 
concern is the concentration of the unemployed among 20-24 year-olds, as this cohort of workers is relatively well-
educated. The number of workers with a tertiary education rose by 46 percent between 2007 and 2012, largely due 
to new entrants likely to be in the 20-24 age group in 2012 and many of whom fresh graduates. According to the 
MoHE (2013), in 2012, a quarter of all graduates had not secured employment at graduation, and World Bank (2013) 
finds that nearly one in five degree holders under the age of 25 were unemployed in 2012.

Figure 34. The youth unemployment rate in Malaysia is 
not atypical 
 
Youth (15-24) unemployment; modeled ILO estimate (LHS); Multiple of youth 
unemployment to overall national unemployment rate (RHS)

Figure 35. Unemployment is concentrated among the 
youth in Malaysia 
 
 
Percent unemployed 
Number of unemployed (thousands)

Companies seem to be willing to pay for talent – when they find it

42. Graduate unemployment is not necessarily linked to inadequate salary incentives for skilled graduates. One 
possible explanation for the relatively high rate of graduate unemployment could be employers’ unwillingness to offer 
the level of compensation needed to meet the expectations of recent graduates and attract the required talent. In 
a 2011 Jobstreet survey, employers claimed many graduates have “unrealistic” salary expectations. Hays (2014, p. 29) 
shows that a graduate accountant makes about 2.5 times more in Singapore compared to Malaysia despite similar 
qualifications; this may influence the salary expectations of Malaysian graduates and their willingness to take up 
available positions. While pay levels could be relevant in specific sectors, many companies say they do pay premium 
wages for graduates with the right skills. About 75 percent companies responded that they have introduced premium 
graduate programs to recruit their top entry-level talent (including management trainee programs), in addition to 
their existing general graduate programs. According to the survey, 43 percent of companies interviewed paid these 
‘premium’ entry-level graduates between RM3,000 – RM5,000 a month (Figure 40). By contrast, only 11 percent of 
respondents paid general entry-level graduates the same salary.

Source: TalentCorp/World Bank 2014 
Source: TalentCorp/World Bank 2014 
 
43. A main driver of graduate unemployment according to survey respondents are skills mismatches between recent 
graduates and employers’ demands. Employers increasingly view soft skills – such as the ability to think critically and 
creatively, and to communicate and work independently – as a key factor in hiring entry-level graduates, but 
graduates from Malaysian universities seem to be lacking in these areas. According to the survey, 81 percent of all 
respondents identify communication skills as the major deficit, followed by creative/critical thinking, analytical and 
problem-solving competencies (Figure 41). For 65 percent of firms answering this question, the overall lack of skills is 
the main difficulty in recruiting local graduates. 
 
44. The skills mismatch is primarily linked to deficiencies in the post-secondary education system, which has not 
evolved in tandem with industry needs. Companies overwhelmingly agree that the content and quality of local 
university education do not adequately prepare students for the workforce. 90 percent of all companies surveyed 
think that universities should provide students with more practical training, while 80 percent think that universities 
should consider reforming university curricula to reflect the current realities of the labor market (Figure 42). The 
majority of companies also think that universities need to improve the quality of teaching, given that many fresh 
graduates do not demonstrate mastery of key concepts related to their job scope. Consistent with these views, firms 
rank foreign universities well above domestic institutes, especially with respect to soft skills. Interestingly, private higher

education institutions (IPTS) rank higher among employers across all skills areas, but again particularly with respect to 
soft skills, strongly suggesting this to be a major area of deficit (Figure 43).12

The quality of teaching
needs to be upgraded so

that graduates have
mastery of key concepts

University curricula
should be reformed to be

Universities should
provide students with
more practical training

Source: OECD 2014 
Source: OECD 2014 
Note: Level 1 students can partially explore familiar problem 
scenarios and only solve straightforward problems. Level 2 
students can explore and partially understand unfamiliar 
problem scenarios, test a simple hypothesis and solve problems 
with a single, specific constraint. 
 
45. At one level, the identified weaknesses in producing graduates with adequate soft skills can be traced back to 
basic education. While the onus is on universities to produce the required skills for the labor market, addressing 
shortcomings in basic education are critical. Consider problem-solving skills, which half of the respondents said was

lacking in Malaysian graduates (Figure 41). In the most recent PISA assessment of creative problem solving 
conducted in 2012 (OECD, 2014), 15 year-old students performed relatively poorly, with about half of students unable 
to understand even a small part of an unfamiliar problem (Figure 44 and Figure 45). Students carry these deficiencies 
up to the tertiary level, where the emphasis shifts to developing in-depth technical knowledge of a subject as 
opposed to improving these skills, which are nonetheless highly prized in labor markets.

46. The skills mismatch is exacerbated by the lack of communication between universities and firms on how to 
develop employable graduates. Universities cannot produce graduates who are ready for the workforce unless they 
develop a clear, accurate understanding of what firms are looking for in entry-level employees and incorporate 
these requirements into the course curricula, teaching and assessment methods, or other means. Unfortunately, most 
companies do not currently engage with local universities on such a strategic level, nor communicate their views of 
what or how students should be learning in order to boost their employability. Less than 10 percent of companies who 
responded to the survey have had experience in developing curricula or joint programs with universities (Figure 46). 
The representation of industry professionals in the teaching faculty of universities is also meagre, with only 3 percent of 
respondents having participated in the classroom as adjunct professors.

Source: TalentCorp/World Bank 2014 
Source: TalentCorp/World Bank 2014 
 
47. Even at the recruitment stage, companies and universities do not always cooperate in matching graduating 
students with entry-level opportunities. Through industry awareness, networking or recruitment events, universities 
provide first-time job seekers with important opportunities to interact with potential employers and understand the 
specific qualifications/skills they are looking for. In turn, these events should help firms identify and recruit high-
performing students. Although this appears to be the case for the majority of respondents in the survey, cooperation 
between local universities and firms in this regard is far from ideal. 34 percent of firms have never approached 
universities to recruit candidates, nor been approached by universities to place their graduates into entry-level 
positions (Figure 47). If graduating students do not have access to potential employers through other means, they 
may not be aware of the full range of opportunities available to them, or fully understand the requirements of entry-
level positions in their fields to position themselves competitively in the application process. 
 
48. Career services centers are underutilized and do not fully understand companies’ needs. Universities’ career 
services centers should be the primary link between students and the labor market, matching students with the 
appropriate types of professional opportunities, providing career counselling and other types of support during the 
job search process. In Malaysia, they are somewhat under-utilized: 53 percent of survey respondents said that they do 
not work with these centers. Engagement with career services centers is lowest among SMEs at 23 percent, followed

by NFPEs at 33 percent (Figure 48). Even companies that have engaged with such services are largely ambivalent on 
their effectiveness; 43 percent of survey respondents opted to remain neutral on the question of whether career 
services centers are effective in matching students with the firm’s needs (Figure 49). While firms’ perceptions of career 
services may vary according to industry, the findings reinforce the overall absence of a functioning mechanism for 
feedback and cooperation between universities and firms to address the skills mismatch.

49. Malaysia has made efforts to help unemployed graduates enter the workforce, but more attention and resources 
must be given to deficiencies in the education system that lead a relatively large share of graduates to become 
unemployed in the first place. Many existing programs to address graduate employability are targeted at those who 
already have degrees, and/or been unemployed for six months or more. Greater emphasis may be given to 
preventative measures that focus on boosting students’ employability before they graduate from university and 
enable graduates to find employment without relying on government resources. 
 
50. In order to align the skills imparted in universities with those required by employers, there must be greater 
collaboration between universities and firms to improve the quality and content of university education. Post-
secondary education can take into account labor market needs to ensure that students graduate with relevant skill 
sets. At a minimum, industry experts could be involved in efforts to improve and develop university curricula to ensure 
that students develop the necessary soft and technical skills required for a particular field. For example, the City 
College of Chicago conducted interviews with employers and partnered with firms to narrow the skills gap among its 
graduates in key sectors of the local economy (see Box 3 for details). Apart from improving content, industry experts 
may also be invited to teach short courses at universities, support final year projects or participate as board members 
of higher education institutions. In addition, the Ministry of Higher Education may consider establishing permanent 
mechanisms for ongoing dialogue between universities and firms on how to improve graduates’ employability. One 
benchmark for such efforts is New Zealand, where the Tertiary Education Commission funded “experts in residence” 
from industries to increase the relevance of curricula and developed a Business Links Fund to formalize industry input 
into curricular design (OECD, 2008). Strengthening collaborations with firms will also enhance the responsiveness of 
universities to the changes in industry demand, enhancing their ability to produce graduates with the relevant skills 
sets.

52. The capacity and effectiveness of career services offices can be significantly improved to prepare students for the 
job search process. Universities’ career services centers are often the primary link between students and employers, 
providing students with information on careers and firms with a qualified pool of candidates from which to tap into. 
However, the survey results suggest that there is vast room for improvement for career services in Malaysian higher 
education. An unpublished study by the Boston Consulting Group suggests that career services centers can play 
expanded roles to enhance graduate employability by hiring staff with the expertise to fulfil three main roles: a) 
provide professional advice to students on career paths, resume-writing and the interview process; b) improve 
student marketability to employers and c) develop partnerships with external firms for industry visits and to recruit 
candidates. 
 
53. Universities and the government can help increase students’ awareness of career options and access to 
information regarding the labor market. One possible reason for the skills mismatch is that students often do not have 
adequate information to select higher education courses that match labor market demands, and end up with non-
marketable degrees for their areas of interest (Ministry of Higher Education, 2012). To address this issue, the 
Government could encourage students to explore a variety of careers even before they enter university by 
disseminating comprehensive, accurate information on career options and their academic requirements. Although 
Malaysia already has online portals such as Ready4Work.my and IWANT2B, it can learn from countries such as Chile 
and Italy, which have developed interactive labor market portals that support students and graduates seeking 
employment (Box 5). In addition, the Government can take steps to augment the ILMIA workforce dashboard to raise 
greater awareness of careers in high demand. Another option to improve coordination among young job-seekers, 
labor market demands and education institutions could be to develop a list of occupations and skills that are 
currently in shortage. In the United Kingdom, the Migration Advisory Committee’s skills shortage list is regularly 
updated and used as a policy tool to influence workforce planning and to guide curriculum development and 
student intake by higher education institutions (Box 6).

Corrective measures to help unemployed graduates could be enhanced

54. Malaysia has a number of programs to support recent graduates who cannot find a job. Following the National 
Graduate Employability Blueprint 2012 – 2017, the Government has implemented several training programs for 
unemployed graduates to boost their chances of finding employment, with some success. For example, the 
Graduate Employment Management Scheme (GEMS) has placed 12,000 unemployed graduates into the workforce 
since its inception in 2009 by training them in soft and sector-specific skills (TalentCorp, 2014). 
 
55. Government-funded training programs to boost the productivity of unemployed graduates and unskilled workers 
could be reviewed to ensure their relevance to firms’ needs. Feedback from employers on programs to meet the skills 
shortage among workers and recent graduates suggests that these programs could be improved. While 72 percent 
of respondents of the Graduate Employability Survey are aware of at least one government-funded training program, 
only 28 percent of companies view participation in such programs as an important factor affecting their hiring 
decisions. Moreover, despite the evidence from the National Employment Return survey (2011) showing that training 
has a positive impact of firms’ productivity, only 24 percent of companies report having a partnership with a training 
provider. 
 
56. Addressing the skills gap among unemployed graduates requires a thorough understanding of who is 
unemployed, and why. Given the relatively high number of unemployed graduates in the country and various 
government agencies with programs for unemployed graduates, the Government needs to differentiate between 
the various types of unemployed graduates, the reasons why they are unable to find work, and the interventions that 
must be taken to help them find employment. Profiling (see Box 7) could help policymakers to: 1) assess the likely 
duration of unemployment for jobless graduates, 2) differentiate between easy- and difficult-to-place jobseekers, 3) 
define the intensity of services offered and identify the type of support that could successfully place the person into 
the workforce. Better profiling of unemployed graduates will not only make it easier for government agencies to 
identify the appropriate type of intervention and prioritize the highest-need groups, but also ensure that public 
resources are used efficiently to enhance graduate employability.

3. Boosting Trade Competitiveness 
 
57. Malaysia’s past economic success has been associated with open international trade, and its move to a 
sustainable and inclusive high-income nation will require further boosting trade competitiveness. In the first chapter of 
this Economic Monitor, we noted that a lift in exports has supported Malaysia’s economic growth in the past two 
quarters. The recovery of the global economy suggests that cyclical factors will continue to lift Malaysia’s trade 
performance in the next few quarters as well, as reflected in the healthy outlook forecast earlier for the export sector. 
This part of the report takes a structural and longer-term view of Malaysia’s trade competitiveness and asks the 
question of how Malaysia can continue to take advantage of international trade to complete its transition to high-
income status. 
 
Trade is an engine of growth towards high-income status

58. As small and open economy, Malaysia’s path to high-income status is tied to its trade performance. Over the 
decades, trade has been a catalyst of growth and development for Asia’s emerging economies, contributing to the 
region’s favorable performance. Indeed, several empirical studies, including Frankel & Romer (1999), Dollar and Kraay 
(2004) and Romalis (2007) have presented evidence of a positive correlation between a country’s trade 
performance and its long-run economic growth. There are three main channels through which trade contributes to 
growth: first, trade represents a significant source of demand for Malaysia’s goods and services, and has allowed 
Malaysia to take advantage of economies of scale that would not otherwise be possible in a small economy. 
Second, open international trade is important to inject competition into the economy; exposing domestic firms to the 
rigors of international markets and providing them with incentives to become more efficient and productive. Finally, 
under the right conditions, trade can generate learning and innovation spillovers by providing firms with access to 
foreign inputs, investment and know-how.

Source: OECD TiVA database, CEIC, and World Bank staff calculations 
Note: Export-oriented industries include palm oil, rubber, petrochemicals, mining and quarrying, electrical and electronics 
manufacturing, accommodation, and transport & storage. 
 
59. Nearly 60 percent of value-added generated in the Malaysian economy is ultimately consumed by foreigners. 
Net exports represented 22 percent of GDP in 2008/2009, and this figure has declined since then. The value-added of 
externally-oriented industries was higher at 38 percent, a figure similar to the estimates of value-added exported that 
have been used in Chapter 1. This chapter uses a new database that identifies how much of the value-added in 
Malaysia is consumed domestically or in foreign markets. The value-added consumed in foreign markets includes not

only that produced by exporting firms, but also the value-added by firms that cater to export-oriented industries, 
including in services. As Figure 50 reveals, through the linkages between domestic- and externally-oriented industries, 
it turns out that nearly 60 percent of the demand for Malaysian value-added actually comes from overseas. This 
suggests that the true importance of foreign demand to the Malaysian economy is much higher than what would 
appear from net exports or even the contribution from externally-oriented industries. 
 
60. Although export performance has recovered in recent quarters, the trend over the past 10 years has been one of 
stagnation and indeed relative decline, especially outside the commodity space. Figure 51 shows that both gross 
exports of goods and services and exports less imports of intermediate goods (a crude proxy of the value-added 
embodied in exports with more frequent data) declined steadily over the past 10 years despite a significant increase 
in commodity prices (crude oil prices increased by 58 percent during this period). In part, this is a reflection of strength 
of domestic demand during a period of weak external demand since the global financial crisis, which caused global 
trade volumes to shrink. In Malaysia, between 2007 and 2013, consumption and investment gained 8 and 4 
percentage points in terms of share to GDP, respectively. Indeed, many Asian economies experienced a similar 
decline in the share of exports to GDP since the crisis and a gain in domestic demand. Nevertheless, the decline in 
Malaysia’s export share (30 percentage points in gross terms or 12 percentage points in ‘value-added’ terms) stands 
out (Figure 52), suggesting that lower competitiveness in export sectors may have played a role.

Source: DOSM, BNM, World Bank calculation 
Source: CEIC, Haver, World Bank staff calculations 
 
61. The underlying causes of the decline in trade competitiveness reflect a shift in the abundance of assets in 
Malaysia relative to its competitors. As oil prices have increased, the value of Malaysia’s energy assets increased and 
it became more attractive for investors to come into the sector. Because the energy and petrochemical sectors have 
a relatively long lag between investments and production, output has yet to pick up more decisively. Meanwhile, as 
Malaysia grew, the availability of low-cost labor dwindled in comparison with neighboring countries. Although 
unskilled foreign workers remain available, the Government has given repeated signals that it intends to reduce the 
economy’s reliance on such workers. On the other hand, as noted in Special Issue Note A, skills mismatches remain an 
issue that makes Malaysia relatively less attractive for firms looking to undertake higher value-added activities. The 
result has been a shift in exports that rely on low-cost labor, especially assembly-based E&E, towards energy-based 
exports, which can be expected to pick up further in the future as new productive capacity comes online. 
 
62. New approaches will be needed to boost trade competitiveness. Malaysia needs to capture a greater slice of 
knowledge-intensive activities in the production process, integrate its domestic firms deeper into GVCs, and to 
expand trade in services. This will involve using trade policy as human capital and institutional transformation policies. 
While these efforts need to be supplemented by broader reforms, possible policy options in the trade arena include: 
promoting exports from knowledge-intensive parts of the value chain that are connected to parts located in

Malaysia – in both electronics and petrochemicals; promoting exports of knowledge-intensive services, including 
through a more open domestic environment in services; reviewing and streamlining non-tariff measures; and using 
trade agreements strategically with a view of supporting domestic reforms. 
 
63. This chapter is organized along five main sections: the first establishes stylized facts about Malaysia’s trade 
competitiveness, attempting to diagnose and disaggregate Malaysia’s relative trade performance in recent years. 
The second part focuses on global value chains, with a focus on the key GVCs in E&E and petrochemicals, and 
looking at the changes in Malaysia’s position in GVCs and linkages between domestic and foreign firms. The third part 
looks at the potential to improve services exports, identifying constraints to services export growth, while the fourth 
part looks at how trade costs can be further reduced. The final part concludes with recommendations for policy 
options with a focus on how Malaysia can boost competitiveness to better position itself for the transition to high-
income status. Throughout, Malaysia’s performance is compared to comparator countries selected using a 
methodology described in Box 8.

Box 8. Choice of Comparator Countries 
 
We benchmark Malaysia against international comparators, including: China, Poland, Mexico, Chile, Singapore, 
Vietnam, Thailand, South Africa, Korea, and the Philippines. 
 
International comparisons set a country's competitiveness into context. Our selection is based on a data-driven 
methodology, which was then informed by the judgment of country experts. The methodology aims at identifying 
countries that are similar in economic development and/or size, competitors with a similar position of the export 
basket or “neighboring” countries within the region. Specifically, we are able to provide benchmarks for 121 
countries worldwide in a 5-dimensional space, using the following indicators as coordinates: export basket 
composition; GDP per capita; population; human capital; and physical capital. Countries in the list are ranked by 
degree of similarity, with similarity decreasing from top to bottom of the list. The network of countries is reported in 
(Figure 53).

Source: World Bank staff calculations, using Comtrade data. 
 
 
Trade is more important to Malaysia than net exports would suggest

64. Trade is more important for Malaysia than suggested by net export figures. The decline in trade competitiveness 
described above is important only to the extent that trade drives economic growth. Since the Global Financial Crisis,

domestic demand, as defined in the national accounts, has grown to 91 percent of GDP as of 2013, with 
consumption gaining 8 percentage points of GDP and investment four. But these figures may be misleading as 
indicators of the relative importance of domestic vs. external final demand for the value-added produced in 
Malaysia (another word for GDP, which is the variable of ultimate concern). This is for two reasons. First, domestic final 
demand includes demand for foreign value-added in the form of imported consumer and investment goods that are 
absorbed by domestic consumption and investment. Second, many sectors that appear domestically-oriented and 
have no direct exports nonetheless provide intermediate inputs to other sectors that are producing for foreign 
demand. These “intermediate” sectors would not produce the same output (or perhaps not even exist at all) if not for 
the existence of foreign demand. 
 
65. Estimates based on a new dataset suggest that final foreign demand absorbs about 60 percent of Malaysia’s 
value-added. The recent release of two new datasets, the OECD-WTO Trade in Value Added (TiVA) database and 
the consortium’s World Input-Output Database (WIOD), have allowed the development of a set of indicators that 
focuses on the share of value added produced in a country that makes its way into final demand in foreign countries. 
This concept – domestic value added embodied in foreign final domestic demand as a share of GDP – is useful to 
understand how much of a country’s GDP is actually being driven by domestic vs. external demand, with high shares 
indicating a high reliance on exports. Intuitively, these indicators explore the information about linkages between 
industries, both domestically and across countries, to estimate how much value-added produced in Malaysia 
ultimately ends up in the final demand of foreign countries. 
 
66. The value added in foreign final demand is very high in Malaysia, compared to countries of similar size. The 
domestic value added embodied in foreign final domestic demand as percentage of a country’s GDP tends to be 
largest in small open economies, such as Brunei Darussalam, Luxembourg, Singapore or Malta, while it is small in large 
countries such as the United States or Japan (Figure 54). It is also large in countries that are highly integrated in global 
value chains, and whose inputs are exported to other countries, including countries in South-East Asia or Eastern 
Europe. The value added in foreign final demand is higher in Malaysia than in most countries in the database.

Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Database, World Bank staff calculations 
 
67. While China is the largest trade partner in gross exports, most Malaysian value-added is finally consumed in the 
United States. Malaysia’s exports to China mostly end up in the United States, which is responsible for the final demand 
of 18 percent of Malaysia’s exports of domestic value added (Figure 55). The Chinese, Korean, Mexican, Philippine, 
and Vietnamese markets rely even more heavily on the United States for final demand of its value added exports, 
with Mexico being a clear outlier (66 percent). Japan (11 percent) and China (8 percent) are also important final 
consumers for Malaysia’s domestic value added in exports. For Poland, four of the top five consumers of the country’s 
value added exports are EU markets. This trend is different than that observed above when considering gross exports,

Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Database, World Bank staff calculations 
 
Malaysia’s export market share languished due to declines in high-tech good shipments

68. Trade competitiveness reflects the ability of a country to maintain or expand its share of world exports. 
Competitiveness is reflected in changes in market shares, both in aggregate and in specific industries. It should be 
measured ideally in terms of the domestic value-added embodied in exports, and also includes a number of 
additional qualitative dimensions, including the extent that trade is promoting knowledge transfers and creating 
demand for knowledge professionals, and Malaysia’s position within different segments of global value chains. Trade 
competitiveness is driven by domestic costs, which are linked to the relative cost of domestic assets (based on their 
relative abundance), as well as trade costs. 
 
69. Malaysia’s export growth has been slowing since before the global financial crisis, suggesting structural rather 
than cyclical factors at play. The post-crisis global economy has been defined by slower global trade, which has 
grown at an annual rate of 4 percent in the post-crisis period in contrast with average pre-crisis growth of 8.3 percent. 
Reflecting the slower growth of global trade, the average growth in gross export volume in most Asian economies 
declined significantly in the post-crisis period, with the exception of Vietnam (Figure 56). While the slowdown in the 
volume of Malaysia’s export growth was not as sharp as that experienced by other economies in the region, this was 
mainly because Malaysia’s pre-crisis export performance had less room to decline post-crisis. 
 
70. As a consequence of weak growth, Malaysia’s share of world exports has fallen slightly in the past decade, 
suggesting a relative decline in overall trade competitiveness. Between 2000 and 2013, Malaysia’s share of global 
trade declined from 1.5 percent to 1.2 percent (Figure 57). Most of this declined occurred between 2000 and 2006. 
Between 2006 and 2010 Malaysia’s market share was generally stable, but it contracted again between 2010-Q4 and 
2014-Q1 at an annual rate of 0.4 percent. Therefore, at least through the global financial crisis, there was evidence of 
reduced competitiveness in Malaysia’s exports. 
 
71. Supply-side factors contributed to the post-crisis decline in market shares. Table 4 decomposes the changes in 
market share growth by demand (geographical/market, and sector/ product) and supply factors (the country

effect); this latter effect is further decomposed into price and volume factors13. Over the post-crisis period, positive 
geographical and price factors (namely the expansion of exports to faster-growing China and rising commodity 
prices), contributing 1.5 and 0.8 percent, respectively, were dominated by losses in supply side factors (the country 
effect) in volumes, which contributed -3.2 pp. The contribution from sectoral factors was negative in recent years.

Source: World Bank Export Competitiveness Database 
Note: Indicators are expressed in log-difference form, which allows additivity across indicators. 
 
72. Malaysia’s declining export market share after the crisis was typical of other ASEAN countries, except Vietnam 
(Table 5). ASEAN export performance lags that of North Asia, especially China. The exception in ASEAN has been 
Vietnam, whose strong export market share growth performance was mainly driven by a positive dynamics of the 
adjusted export market share in volume terms (namely, increase in capacity from investments for example from 
Samsung). Interestingly, all South-East Asian peer countries—and especially Singapore and Thailand—showed a 
negative push from the supply side, which was also mainly driven by negative volume factors. Meanwhile price 
effects were heterogeneous. Market factors showed a positive growth contribution in all South East Asian countries, 
reflecting increasing trade with China and emerging markets more broadly within the region. 
 
73. The negative contribution from sectoral factors was concentrated in high-tech sectors, primarily E&E. The 1990s to 
2000s saw a generalized shift towards greater technology embodied in Malaysia’s export basket (Figure 58). Partly as 
a result of the commodity boom and partly due to declining E&E output, this trend was somewhat reversed in the 
more recent period up to 2013. E&E exports declined from 62 percent of the export basket in 2000 to 37 percent in 
2013 while exports of raw commodities climbed from 13 to 22 percent (Figure 59). The demand for Malaysian high-

tech exports declined further since 2010 by 1.3 percent and 0.2 percent, in price and volume terms respectively 
(Figure 60), driven by declines in electrical and machinery equipment (Figure 61). Meanwhile, the export growth 
contribution of resource based manufactures was positive both in volume and price terms, reflecting the increased 
role of commodities in the export basket.

Source: World Bank WITS 
Source: CEIC, World Bank staff calculations 
Note: E&E and Petrochemicals (petroleum products, chemicals 
and chemical products) as defined by BNM 
 
74. Nevertheless, E&E remains the largest category of exports by value. E&E products comprise 21 out of the top 50 
export products, measured at the HS-6 digit level of detail (Table 6).14 In line with with the rise in commodity-linked 
exports seen especially since the crisis, derivatives of the petroleum and chemicals sector have more recently 
emerged as a key sector, climbing to 17 percent of total exports from 6 percent in 2000 and 10 percent in 2007, and 
accounting for an additional 10 of the top 50 export products.

Source: OECD, WDI 
Source: CEIC and World Bank staff calculations 
 
75. The changing composition of exports is closely linked to the shift in destinations – in other words, sectoral and 
market effects are linked. The share of exports to East Asia has grown incrementally over the last 15 years from 41.9 
percent in 2000-04 to 48.3 percent in 2011-13 (Figure 62). During the same period, the share of exports going to 
advanced economies has declined from 44 percent in 2000-04 to 29.3 percent in 2011-13. Much of this change has 
occurred as the nature of trade in Malaysia’s key manufacturing industries, particularly E&E, has evolved from the 
production and trade in finished products to greater trade in inputs in the value chain distributed across a wider 
range of locations. However, this shift is also related to the shift in the product composition of Malaysia’s export basket 
towards commodities. This can be seen in Figure 63: only about a quarter of exports to fast-growing markets are high-
tech manufacturing, compared to almost 50 percent to the mature markets of the US, EU and North Asia.

76. Global value chains (GVCs) have profoundly changed international trade paradigms. Global value (or supply) 
chains involve the manufacture of a single good in multiple countries simultaneously by division of tasks and linking 
the steps of production through international trade. This process, variously called production fragmentation, vertical 
specialization, trade in tasks, or “slicing up the value chain” has changed the nature of trade in important ways. First, 
participation in GVCs requires looking at trade in an integrated manner. The ease of importing becomes critical given 
the significant use of imported intermediate goods in exports. Second, the high share of imported inputs and trade in 
parts and components requires different tools to assess domestic value-added that is ultimately embodied in exports, 
as well as the ultimate sources of supply and demand for a country’s value-added. Finally, comparative advantage 
applies increasingly to tasks and is reflected in a country’s position within the value chain, rather than products. 
Accordingly, this section considers Malaysia’s integration within GVCs, the extent of Malaysian value-added in 
exports and Malaysia’s position in the value chain.

Malaysia is a key player in GVCs, but value-added is relatively low

Malaysia remains a key player in global value chains

77. In a GVC world, imports are critical for export competitiveness. A country’s ability to participate in GVCs depends 
as much on its capacity to efficiently source world-class inputs as on its capacity to export. One cannot become a 
major exporter within GVCs without first becoming a successful importer of intermediate imports. This section is aimed 
at identifying the extent to which Malaysia and its peers source domestically or internationally the intermediate goods 
they use to export. This will provide a first indication of their participation in GVCs and provides a building block to 
later assess the domestic value added embodied in these countries’ exports, and how the latter has shifted over time.

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from UN Comtrade 
Note: Products from the E&E sector are color-coded in blue, whereas those from the petrochemical sector are color-coded in 
orange, and products from all other sectors in grey. 
 
78. A high and stable share of intermediate imports suggests Malaysia, similar to her neighbors, remains well 
integrated in GVCs. Intermediate goods (parts and components, identified following the methodology discussed in

Box 9) represent 74 percent of total imports in Malaysia. Among the top 50 exports, 32 are intermediate goods (Table 
7). Figure 64 shows that this is typical in East Asia. In recent years, the share of intermediate goods in gross imports has 
been stable or slightly declining in EAP MICs, while the share is up in lower- (Vietnam) and higher-income (Korea, 
Singapore) countries. Figure 65 shows the share of intermediate goods in gross imports has increased over the past 
one and a half decades, but more so in high income countries, reflecting the greater intensity of intra-GVC trade. 
Moreover, the share is substantially higher for low and middle income countries, reaching 71 percent in 2012 as 
opposed to 61 percent in high income countries. This is likely linked to the fact that low and middle income countries 
specialize in processing such intermediates for subsequent export, while a larger share of imports by high income 
countries are final goods.

MALAYSIA ECONOMIC MONITOR JUNE 2014 » 42

Box 9. Classification of intermediate inputs by Broad Economic Category 
 
The above figures report the share of intermediates in country imports and exports by selected industries: all sectors, 
petrochemicals and electronics. The classification is based on BEC. Trade data are from ITC – all the trade flows are 
converted in HS 1996 6 digits. 
 
All Sectors 
We consider as intermediate the following BEC categories: 
 111: Food and beverages – Primary – Mainly for industry 
 121: Food and beverages – Processed – Mainly for industry 
 21: Industrial supplies not elsewhere specified – Primary 
 22: Industrial supplies not elsewhere specified – Processed 
 31: Fuels and lubricants – Primary 
 32: Fuels and lubricants – Processed 
 42: Capital goods – Parts and accessories (except transport equipment) 
 53: Transport equipment – Parts and accessories 
 
Petrochemicals and Electrical and Electronics Products 
In order to identify the intermediate trade within the selected sectors we create a concordance between the 
HS1996 classification and the ISIC rev 3 classification (used in the TiVA database). This allows us to identify 
intermediate products, as defined above, within specific ISIC sections. 
 
Source: Authors

Box 10. Why should we be concerned about value added in manufacturing? – an example of the iPhone 
 
The underlying reason for carrying out a deeper analysis of value addition provided by firms operating within 
Malaysia in key global value chains, is to try to gain a fuller understanding of how much Malaysia benefits from 
such GVC participation. For example, while Malaysia exports large aggregate volumes of E&E products, the 
country also imports substantial E&E intermediate inputs. So it is natural to ask: (i) how much does Malaysia really 
benefit; and (ii) is Malaysia capturing an increasing share of value addition? 
 
While Malaysian firms are not closely involved in the production of an Apple iPhone, it is an interesting illustrative 
example of which countries benefit from producing the constituent parts and components. Each import of a 
finished iPhone into the United States contributes roughly US$ 200 to the China-US bilateral trade deficit. This kind of

15 Defined as I2EB_IMINPcs=I2EBcs/IMINPcs, where I2EB denotes the buyer c’s intermediate imports embodied in its gross exports and 
IMINP the buyer’s total intermediate imports in a sector s. This measure is computed using input-output tables and trade data.

product is thus considered a desirable “high tech” product with likely high knowledge spillovers. 
 
Yet in an era of fragmented production processes and extended value chains, how much of this value really 
accrues to China? Following the value added requires information not easily available, but the evidence suggests 
that it is not very much. Of the US$ 649 average retail price for an Apple iPhone 5s, US$ 450 of that cost is captured 
by US companies and workers in the distribution, licensing, royalties, software and design processes (Figure 67). 
Each iPhone is imported into the US from China at a cost of US$ 199. However of this total production cost, 
manufacturing assembly represents just US$ 8 of the total. The remainder of the manufacturing costs is accounted 
for by imported parts and components with a breakdown of materials totaling US$ 191. The largest share of these 
intermediate materials comes from Japan, followed by Korea, Germany and the US. In the end, little more than 1 
percent of the total value added in an iPhone is accrued to China’s labor for what is primarily assembly work.

Software, 
licensing, 
royalties and 
distribution costs

Source: World Bank estimates using IHS Technology data. 
 
 
81. About 62 percent of the value-added embodied in Malaysia’s exports is produced domestically, a share lower 
than many comparable countries. Gross exports can be broken down into the value-added directly contributed from 
domestic exporting industries, that indirectly contributed by domestic industries that provide inputs to exporting 
industries, the foreign value-added coming from imported intermediate goods, and the domestic value-added in 
imported intermediate goods. Domestic value added embodied in gross exports represents 62 percent of total 
exports in Malaysia (Figure 68). This figure is relatively low compared to regional comparators (Figure 69). In some 
cases, this can be attributed to the fact that some of these countries have a higher share of commodity exports 
(South Africa, Chile). Therefore, it will be more informative to consider value-added in exports by specific industries, 
which will be discussed in the next section. Because of the expansion of trade within GVCs, most countries 
experienced a decline in the domestic value-added embodied in exports (i.e. those countries were specializing and 
importing more intermediate inputs). In Malaysia’s case the increase in value-added in exports may be explained by 
the increased share of commodity exports noted in Figure 59. 
 
82. Conversely, foreign value-added embodied in exports stands largely unchanged at about 38 percent. The 
reciprocal of total foreign value-added embodied in gross imports as a percent of gross export (by Industry) captures 
the country’s GVC position as a user of foreign inputs in its exports (upstream links or backward participation). For the 
world as a whole, only 20 percent of gross exports comprise value that was added in a foreign nation (Baldwin and 
Lopez-Gonzales, 2013). Figure 70 shows the foreign value added in a country’s gross exports for 1995 and 2008 for all 
the countries in the TiVA database. Two patterns stand out: First, almost all countries saw their numbers increase 
between 1995 and 2008. The expansion is particularly strong in emerging countries, but also in some developed 
countries such as Japan. The figure is lower for large nations – especially the manufacturing giants, but Germany is

exports is lower in Malaysia than most peers 
 
Domestic value added in gross exports, all sectors

Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Database, World Bank staff calculations 
 
83. Despite slowing export performance, the small increase in the share of domestic value-added embodied in gross 
exports resulted in a small gain in global market share of value-added exports, at least through 2008/2009. Figure 71 
shows that the growth rate of Malaysia’s domestic value-added in exports between 1995 and 2008/2009 was slightly 
above the global average and in line with ASEAN peers Thailand and Singapore. Growth also accelerated across the 
three periods under analysis. However, this acceleration was more modest in Malaysia compared to Thailand and 
Singapore as well as the world average. Overall, Malaysia’s market share of global trade in value-added terms 
increased slightly between 1995 and 2008/9 thanks to faster growth in the initial (1995-2000) period (Figure 72). As 
Figure 70 and Figure 71 show, increased integration in global value chains reflected by higher foreign value added in 
exports has allowed China and Vietnam to rapidly grow their own domestic value-added exported.

Malaysia has moved relatively upstream in GVCs

Source: UN Comtrade, World Bank staff calculations 
 
84. While the “buying side” is an indicator of integration in GVCs, adding the “selling side” provides a perspective on 
the position in the value chain. The value added in exports is a reflection of the “buying” side of GVCs because it is 
primarily concerned with the domestic and foreign “ingredients” in exports. Turning to the “selling” side, the next 
question is whether firms are selling into export markets (1) intermediate goods that will be processed further into the 
value-chain, (2) intermediate goods that will be processed into final consumption goods in the partner country; or (3) 
final goods. The closer to (1) are the country’s exports, the more “upstream” (i.e. removed from the final consumer) it 
is. In other words, “upstreamness” is the number of stages between the nation’s producers and the final consumers of 
its value-added. Antràs, Chor, Fally and Hillberry (2012) call this ‘distance to final demand’. In some industries, 
countries that are closer to the final consumer (downstream) or at the beginning of the value chain (upstream) seem

to reap the largest gains in terms of value added. 16 This assumption does not hold for every type of production and 
GVCs (e.g. the high-end furniture manufacturing where production and design usually take place at the same stage 
of production)17, but it is generally true for some sectors and value chains (e.g. E&E). 
 
85. Most of Malaysia’s top exports are also intermediate goods. The majority of Malaysia’s top 50 exports are 
intermediate goods, parts and components that feed into the production of other products (Table 6). Exports of 
intermediate goods are 75 percent of gross exports (Figure 73). Only South Africa and Chile have higher shares, which 
is not surprising given the importance of raw materials for these countries’ exports. Similar to all other countries with 
the exception of Singapore, the share of intermediate exports in gross exports has increased between 2009 and 2012, 
reflecting increased intra-GVC trade as well as higher commodity prices. 
 
86. In addition, the increase in the share of Malaysian value-added embodied in third country exports suggest those 
intermediate goods are processed further, representing a move upstream in the value chain. Almost all countries 
increased the value-added they export that is embodied in intermediate goods that go for further processing (Figure 
74). This is partly the effect of longer value chains and increasing specialization in GVCs worldwide and partly due to 
higher commodity prices, which led to rapid growth of a very upstream and high-value added export (commodities). 
Indeed, the leading countries in supplying value-added to third countries’ exports are all exporters of natural 
resources, including Russia, Saudi Arabia, Norway, Chile, Australia and Indonesia. Malaysia falls on the lower end of 
this range, close to Japan and the US, two large non-natural resource intensive countries. On the other side of the 
spectrum are countries with very low export shares of domestic value-added embodied in third countries’ exports, 
ranging from only 5 percent in Cambodia to 14 to 17 percent in Mexico, China, South Africa, Vietnam and Turkey, 
suggesting that they are increasingly specialized in final production stages of the value chain. In other words, these 
countries are located relatively downstream in value chains, tending to export more final goods to end consumers.

87. For the GVCs in which Malaysia participates, the country maintains an upstream position relatively far from final 
consumption. We draw on the work of Chor (2014) to measure where Malaysia is positioned along the global 
production line, asking if exports tend to be in relatively upstream industries, far from final demand, or downstream 
industries closer to the final consumer. Chor (2014) calculates a measure of the production line position, or

upstreamness, for 426 industries (279 manufacturing) using 2002 data from the United States’ input-output tables18. The 
average position of Malaysia’s exports from final demand can be calculated as the average upstreamness measure 
for each industry weighted by the importance of that industry in Malaysia’s export basket. Figure 75 plots these 
calculations to show where Malaysia is positioned in global production lines vis-à-vis its trade partners and how this 
has changed over time. The electrical industry is the closest to final demand, followed by the manufacturing and 
electronics industries. Overall, E&E and manufacturing exports have all moved upstream since 2000, or further away 
from final demand. Yet this is not the case for the petrochemicals industry, which has moved downstream (despite 
remaining an upstream industry in general).

upstream than its import profile, or it may be the case that the country is a large importer of finished consumer goods, 
rather than being a reflection of the composition of its exports. The longer the domestic “length” the greater on 
average the number of tasks (production steps) being performed in the economy. Although the gap was positive 
before 2010, it has become negative ever since. This shift is being driven by exports that have become more 
upstream or further from final demand; import upstreamness has not changed significantly over the last decade.

China moves to the center of the trading network

Source: Own illustration based on OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset. 
 
90. China has moved to the center of the global trade network in the past 15 years, attracting Malaysia to its 
gravitational pull. The full pattern of “made-here-sold-there” trade, as well as its evolution, can be better understood 
with a simple visualization of the global network of value-added trade. Representations of trade networks can inform 
which countries are the important suppliers and sellers of a country’s value-added. The visualization is based on the

undirected network between 1995 and 2009, constructed using the measure of domestic value-added embodied in 
gross exports19. It is noteworthy how China moved at the core of the network in the 15 years covered by the analysis 
(Figure 78 and Figure 79). From a peripheral node in 1995, it became one of the three main nodes of global trade 
and production networks in 2009. This shift has affected directly Malaysia, whose main trade partner, in terms of 
value-added flows moved from the USA in 1995 to China in 2009. On the selling side, however, the USA remained as 
Malaysia’s main supplier. 
 
91. Malaysia therefore buys value-added primarily from the USA and sells it primarily to China, the main buyer of 
value-added worldwide. We visualize the network of trade using the measure of domestic value-added embodied in 
gross exports from the buyer’s perspective as separate from the seller’s perspective20. Malaysia is in the supply system 
of the United States and in the buying system of China. In 2009, Malaysia sourced more than 22 percent of overall 
imported value-added from USA (Figure 80), while China absorbed more than 28 percent of the value-added 
exported by Malaysia(Figure 81).

Source: Own illustration based on OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset 
 
92. Malaysia’s position in GVCs is central and well-clustered in the network. Different metrics from Network Analysis 
help quantify countries’ positions in the global network of value-added trade. Two main concepts are presented in 
Table 8, constructed using domestic value-added in gross exports. The measure of structural integration is a measure 
of the centrality of country i relative to the overall structure of the network. It is the most representative measure of the 
network, which captures the strength of the links and their closeness/proximity. This can be computed from the 
buyer’s (BONwin) or seller’s (BONwout) perspective. Clustering (CCw) is instead a measure of the transitivity of the 
network. It measures how much the neighbors of country i are themselves connected. It captures whether country i is 
strong because it trades a lot with other countries that are also strong. Malaysia ranks 13th from the buyer’s 
perspective and 18th from the seller’s perspective of 56 countries, supporting the above analysis that the country is 
well-integrated into GVCs on both the buyer’s and seller’s perspectives, but is relatively stronger on the buyer’s side of

the chain. Malaysia is also well-clustered in the network (ranking 23rd), suggesting that the country trades with other 
countries that have strong linkages. Not surprisingly, the United States, Germany, China, and Japan are the strongest. 
Nevertheless, China and Germany are relatively more important from a buyer’s perspective – supplying value-added 
– while the United States is relatively more important from a seller’s perspective – demanding value-added.

driven by high-technology products. Accordingly, the next two sections will look in more depth at the two largest 
tradable sectors in the Malaysian economy – E&E and petrochemicals – with a view to diagnosing demand side 
trends and disaggregating the participation of Malaysia within these two GVCs. 
 
Electrical and Electronics (E&E)

94. The most famous example of the successful development of value chains is the East Asia value chain in electrical 
and electronic (E&E) products, in which Malaysia participates. Hiratsuka (2005) and Baldwin (2008) provide an 
overview of how the production and delivery of products such as personal computers and mobile phones were 
distributed among many firms and countries which either produced sub-assemblies (Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand), 
performed final assembly (China), engaged in product design and development (Japan, United States) or in the 
intermediate production planning known as original design manufacturing or ODM (Taiwan).

China has assumed a central role in the E&E GVC

95. A key feature of the E&E industry over the past 15 years is the growing role of China and the relative decline of 
ASEAN MICs, including Malaysia. Figure 82 shows the trajectory of E&E exports in nominal terms compared to the 
export values registered in 2000 for respective countries or regions, while Figure 83 shows the disparity in growth rates 
between China and the rest of the world both in the pre-and post-crisis environments. Both figures illustrate that 
although middle-income ASEAN countries remain important players in the E&E GVC, their contribution relative to 
China was declining even before the crisis.

Source: Own illustration based on OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset 
 
98. An analysis of revealed comparative advantage (RCA) further suggests that middle-income ASEAN countries, 
including Malaysia, have been losing competitiveness in E&E. RCA indices monitored over time can point towards 
directional changes in comparative advantage (Maule 1996)22. Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines still have

revealed comparative advantage in producing electrical and electronic products, but this has declined, in 
Malaysia’s case significantly, between 2002-2006 and 2007-2011 (Figure 88). Meanwhile, the RCA of North Asian 
countries (China; Taiwan, China; and Hong Kong) has increased in the period. Interestingly, the RCA of Japan and 
Korea has either stagnated or declined, perhaps reflecting a shift in production base and greater fragmentation of 
global value chains. It is also noteworthy that while Vietnam does not yet appear to have a revealed comparative 
advantage in E&E, the change in RCA is the largest positive change in the period analyzed. 
 
99. In value-added terms, RCA analysis suggests that Malaysia has made modest gains. As another indicator of 
competitiveness in GVCs, Figure 88 and Figure 89 present the RCA indicators calculated using the TiVA database. 
Unlike traditional RCA indicators, the measure is constructed using domestic value-added embodied in gross exports. 
A country is said to have a comparative advantage in the sector if this version of the RCA measure is above 1. Like 
Malaysia, many of the comparator countries also reveal a comparative advantage in electrical and electronic 
goods (with the exception of Vietnam and Indonesia).

Source: WITS and World Bank staff calculations 
Source: OECD-WTO TiVA database and staff calculations 
 
100. China’s increased presence in E&E has also been accompanied by higher investments in research and 
development. Integration into the GVCs involves large foreign investments, which have the potential to bring 
technology transfers. Leveraging on these dynamics by putting in place an ecosystem which supports the industry is 
therefore critical in sustaining a country’s competitive advantage. For example, the availability of skilled labor, the 
emphasis on R&D23 (Figure 90), the existence of supporting industries, political stability, the ease of doing business, and 
financial incentive packages offered to investors are factors that attract investments. With the government’s support, 
China has managed to build this ecosystem, including a cluster of supporting industries that enables it to compete in 
the global markets. For instance, emphasis has been given to improve indigenous innovative capacity within the

23 Although the electronics sectors in different countries have experienced different recovery trajectories since the GFC, a common 
characteristic that sustained their competitiveness over the years is that the R&D intensity, notably in China, South Korea and 
Singapore.

Source: CEIC and World Bank staff calculations 
 
101. Part of the decline in performance in the ASEAN MICs and Malaysia in particular may be linked to an erosion of 
the traditional sources of competitiveness. The three ASEAN countries traditionally plugged into the computer 
components industry are Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand. Singapore has a number of indigenous firms focused on 
supplying a wide range of services and advanced technology components to multinationals. Thailand and Malaysia 
specialize in hard-disk drives as well as integrated circuit packages, although Malaysia has been able to attract some 
R&D around the manufacturing core of integrated circuits, notably from Intel. Thailand and Malaysia’s historical 
reliance on competing on attractive labor costs and adequate infrastructure is being threatened by the emergence 
of Vietnam as a cost-competitive country. Vietnam is gaining foothold in the E&E GVC with local firms initially acting 
as suppliers to multinationals25. Vietnamese engineers reportedly are cost-competitive, as their wages are half of the 
engineers in China. The Vietnamese assembly workers are also highly cost-competitive as the minimum wage can be 
as low as only half of the average of the manufacturing wage in certain manufacturing areas in China. However, in 
terms of labor productivity, Vietnamese workers’ productivity is reportedly half of that of China’s workers26. 
 
102. ASEAN countries like Malaysia, while having an adequate supply base, may not in fact be present in the most 
critical parts of the production chain for fast-growing product segments. The key components produced in the ASEAN 
region include computer parts and components such as hard disk drives (HDDs), computer central processing units 
(CPUs), and assembled printed circuit boards. Malaysia has a competitive network of suppliers in the northern region, 
Penang, which forms a relatively strong electronics cluster but similarly to Thailand concentrates in the production of 
PC parts and semiconductors,27 a segment which is growing less rapidly compared to the mobile computing 
segment28 (Figure 91). Malaysia has a smaller presence in the mobile computing segment compared to China, 
Taiwan and South Korea. Malaysia’s position in the slow-growing market segments and China’s growing role as the

leading location for final assembly of computers products and parts could have affected Malaysia’s export 
competitiveness and resulted in an erosion of its global market share.

Value-added of the E&E industry has increased, but remains relatively low

103. Malaysia remains a key player in the E&E global value chain despite the decline in market share of gross exports. 
The large share of intermediate imports embodied in exports (87 percent; Figure 92) indicates that Malaysia’s imports 
of E&E are mostly processed within the GVC for downstream exports rather than used for final domestic absorption. 
From 1995 to 2009, Malaysia actually increased its global role as a supplier of value-added in E&E, reaching a share of 
3.6 percent of overall sectoral flows (Figure 93). Hence, the share of E&E global value-added accruing to Malaysia 
has been increasing (Figure 94). Another implication of Figure 93 is that the E&E industry has moved upstream, which is 
confirmed by Figure 95, which also shows that the domestic length of the value chain shrunk post-crisis.

Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset and authors’ calculations 
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from UN Comtrade 
 
104. Domestic value-added of Malaysian E&E exports have increased, but remain among the lowest of comparator 
countries partly due to weak linkages with domestic players. Figure 96 shows that between 1995 and 2009 the 
domestic value added in E&E exports declined in most East Asian countries due to the significant increase in intra-
GVC trade. Malaysia’s domestic value-added embodied in gross exports of E&E increased slightly during the period, 
but at 44 percent remains low compared to peers. Figure 97 suggests that the limited value-added in overall exports 
is partly due to the small contribution from domestic intermediaries, implying Malaysia’s E&E industry has limited 
domestic linkages – a hypothesis that is considered more carefully below.

Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Database 
Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Database 
 
105. Malaysia relies most heavily on intra-industry imports for the foreign value-added of its exports of E&E. Figure 98 
shows the foreign value-added in gross exports broken up by source industry for the Malaysian electrical and 
electronics sector in 2008 and compares it to the same sector in other comparator countries. In Malaysia, intra-
industry foreign value-added contributed a dominant share (25 percent). While this figure is also large in other 
countries such as Vietnam and Mexico, the share in Malaysia is overwhelming. This may be linked to the limited

domestic linkages, and suggests that Malaysia may be able to add more domestic value added to the E&E industry’s 
exports by moving these tasks domestically. Business services and wholesale and retail trade are all important foreign 
value-added inputs to E&E exports in all other countries considered, but not necessarily in the same order.

Opportunities to further increase value-added through improved linkages

106. Firm-level analysis confirms the limited linkages in the E&E industry in Malaysia. Javorcik 2004, Blalock and Gertler 
2008, Havranek and Irsova 2011 support the existence of positive backward spillovers from multinationals on local 
suppliers, while evidence on forward spillovers is mixed. This section uses measures of direct linkages in GVCs derived 
from firm-level data from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys, which were last conducted for Malaysia in 2007. This 
section differentiates between three types of firms that are characteristic of GVCs: multinationals relying on inputs 
from domestic suppliers, domestic producers that rely on imported inputs, and domestic suppliers that export.

107. E&E multinationals in Malaysia source a majority of inputs from foreign sources. While results are only indicative 
and aggregate, Figure 99 shows that in Malaysia multinationals in the E&E industry tend to source most inputs from 
foreign sources. The share of domestic inputs is lower than in comparable countries, except for the Philippines. Figure 
100 shows that domestic firms in Malaysia and all comparator countries except Russia use more domestic inputs 
compared to multinationals. Malaysia’s domestic firms’ use of domestic inputs is more typical compared to that in 
other countries analyzed, though significantly lower than other key players in the E&E GVC such as Vietnam and 
China. 
 
108. Domestic E&E firms in Malaysia hold a lower share of exports than multinationals, but the highest share among 
comparator countries. Malaysian multinationals in the E&E sector, similarly to those in other mid-sized economies in the 
E&E GVC such as Philippines and Poland, export most of their output (Figure 101). Domestically-owned E&E firms in 
Malaysia export less than 1/3 of their output (Figure 102). Nonetheless, these numbers are well above other 
comparator countries, confirming Malaysia’s export vocation in E&E. These charts confirm that Malaysian domestic 
firms are linked to GVCs, but primarily in third countries, where their participation is small relative to domestic and 
other imported inputs.

109. Malaysia’s declining share of E&E exports in the recent decade has been accompanied by a rise in the share of 
non-E&E29 manufactured exports. Non-E&E manufactured exports has increased from approximately 26 percent in 
2000-2004 to 37 percent of total exports in 2011-2013 (Figure 103). Supported by the domestic availability of raw 
materials and ongoing policy initiatives to move the resource-based sector up the value chain, Malaysia has 
emerged as a major exporter of downstream products in chemicals and chemical-related products, refined 
petroleum products and rubber products. In addition, higher investment in optical and scientific equipment has also 
resulted in stronger growth in this industry in Malaysia. Box 11 provides more details on the petrochemical industry in 
Malaysia. 
 
110. A decline in output from the oil and gas sector has prompted a move downstream into petrochemicals. The oil 
and gas sector30 contributes significantly to the Malaysian economy, in terms of both value-added (approximately 10

percent share of GDP in 2013) and export receipts (2013: approximately 25 percent of gross exports). As a non-
renewable resource, the sector is projected to face a natural decline of 2 percent annually (ETP, 2011). Thus, 
PETRONAS has been working to spur downstream activity in the oil and gas industry and diversify sources of growth. 
Malaysia’s strength is in its existing ecosystem of oil and gas-related industries, comprising of upstream extraction, 
offshore structure manufacturers and fabricators, oil and gas storage and terminal operators, engineering and logistic 
services providers, steel and petrochemical players. This ecosystem provides a strong foundation for further expansion 
in downstream activities.

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from UN Comtrade 
Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset and staff calculations 
 
111. Malaysia is an emerging player in the petrochemical value chain. Malaysia is a producer of oil and gas, but the 
share of intermediate imports embodied in exports is relatively large (66 percent; Figure 104), suggesting that 
Malaysia’s vocation as an efficient importer also applies in this sector. This may be due to the fact that Malaysia 
exports high-quality Tapis crude oil and imports oil lower-grade oil. From 1995 to 2009 Malaysia increased its global 
role as supplier of value-added in petrochemicals, reaching a share of 0.9 percent of overall sectoral flows (Figure

105). At the same time, the industry’s exports have moved downstream, although a parallel increase in the 
upstreamness of imports kept the length of the industry negative (Figure 106).

Source: Own calculations based on OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset 
 
112. Domestic value-added of Malaysian petrochemical exports have increased. Figure 107 shows that between 
1995 and 2009 the domestic value-added in petrochemical exports declined in most comparator countries. 
Malaysia’s domestic value added embodied in gross exports of petrochemicals increased during the period; 
however. At 66 percent, it is average compared to comparator countries. Figure 108 shows that this is largely due to 
indirect domestic share of gross exports – primarily the mining (upstream) industry, which is larger in Malaysia than in 
similar countries.

Source: Own calculations based on OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset 
 
113. Malaysia relies equally on mining and intra-industry imports for its value-added exports of petrochemicals. Figure 
109 shows that total foreign value-added in gross exports in this sector in Malaysia reached 34 percent in 2008. While 
intra-industry foreign value-added is an important input to petrochemical exports globally, it is not the most important 
foreign value-added input for many countries. Rather, mining and quarrying tends to be the most important foreign 
value added input. This is less the case for Malaysia, where these sectors have equal shares (6.7 percent). This 
suggests that Malaysia’s petrochemical exports may be relying too heavily on intra-industry foreign inputs that are not 
processed domestically. Business services and wholesale and retail trade are also important foreign value-added 
inputs to petrochemical exports in many of the countries considered and highlights the importance of services sectors 
for competitiveness in manufacturing. 
 
114. Similarly to E&E, most value-added is supplied by the US, while sales are primarily to China. Figure 110 and Figure 
111 visualize the seller and buyer perspectives respectively focusing on the petrochemicals sector. In 2009 the United 
States is still the most relevant supplier of value added for Malaysian exports (24 percent). From the buyer perspective 
Singapore absorbs around 21 percent of all petrochemical value added exported by Malaysia, and then re-exports 
to China.

Source: WITS and World Bank staff calculations 
Source: Own illustration based on OECD-WTO TiVA Dataset 
 
115. Malaysia’s comparative advantage in in petrochemicals is more unique in East Asia compared to E&E. Figure 112 
and Figure 113 suggest that Malaysia has revealed comparative advantage in petrochemicals, with a larger RCA 
when measured in value-added terms. The RCA that Malaysia achieves in the petrochemicals industry is more unique 
relative to its regional comparators compared to E&E, with the exception of Singapore. This result supports the findings 
on Malaysia’s competitive edge in petrochemicals (Box 11).

Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys, years indicated in charts 
Note: Averages not weighted due to missing strata for Malaysia 
 
116. Domestic sourcing is higher in the petrochemical industry compared to E&E. Figure 114 and Figure 115 show the 
extent firms in the petrochemical industry source inputs domestically as opposed to imports. Linkages in Malaysia’s 
petrochemical industry appear greater compared to the E&E industry. The pattern of domestic firms sourcing more 
inputs domestically also holds in petrochemicals, but the difference is less marked. The more significant contribution

from domestic suppliers is partly due to Malaysia’s role as a commodity producer, but may also signal that the 
industry has developed more significant linkages compared to E&E. 
 
117. Under the Economic Transformation Programme, the oil, gas and energy sector has been identified as a National 
Key Economic Area, with a target annual growth of 5 percent between 2010 to 2020. 13 entry point projects (EPPs) 
have been identified (Table 9). The EPPs emphasize on enhancing the downstream oil & gas related manufacturing 
and services activities, while ensuring sustained oil and gas production levels and diversification into alternative 
energy capabilities.

Table 9. Entry Point Projects for the Oil, Gas and Energy NKEA