How does geopolitical alignment affect trade? ........................................................ 37

Quantifying the impact of geopolitical distance on trade .................................... 41

Risks to trade from geopolitical tensions .................................................................... 44

Conclusion ............................................................................................................................... 47

The US dollar and capital flows to EMEs ................................................................................. 51

Portfolio and banking inflows to EMEs ......................................................................... 53

What factors drive portfolio and banking inflows to EMEs? ................................ 54

Impact of global factors and interest differentials ................................................... 56

Has the impact of global factors changed over time? ............................................ 58

Conclusions .............................................................................................................................. 60

International finance through the lens of BIS statistics: 
bank exposures and country risk ............................................................................................... 69

Origin and evolution of the CBS ...................................................................................... 71

Concentration in banks’ country exposures ................................................................ 72

Box A: The structure of the BIS consolidated banking statistics (CBS) ............. 74

Measuring exposure to country risk ............................................................................... 75

Banks’ exposures and financial stability ........................................................................ 78

Maturity of international claims ....................................................................................... 79

Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ 81

De-risking began to stir financial markets over the review period but the stresses 
proved short-lived.1 While markets experienced sharp bouts of volatility, investors 
quickly reverted to the risk-on mode that had prevailed for several months. Financial 
conditions thus remained loose. Yet the turbulence illustrates how markets have 
become vulnerable to swift mood shifts, especially related to current growth jitters.

Although de-risking pressures had been brewing since the beginning of July, the 
cusp of the stress occurred at the beginning of August. In July, markets had already 
experienced some corrections, especially in tech stocks that had previously surged in 
valuations. Volatility had picked up, with early signs of deleveraging and a reversal of 
trades predicated on past trends and low volatility. In early August, following Federal 
Reserve and Bank of Japan policy meetings perceived as somewhat hawkish, markets 
overreacted to a disappointing US labour market release. While the equity market 
correction began in the United States on Friday 2 August, Japan emerged as a locus 
of turbulence the following Monday. Leveraged positions, above all carry trades, 
came under pressure, with the yen appreciating sharply and the stock market selling 
off. The equity slump and the currency repricing reverberated globally, and the VIX 
spiked. That said, markets stabilised remarkably quickly and erased losses within days, 
partly thanks to more benign incoming data and central bank communication. In early 
September, volatility resurfaced again when negative US macro releases led to 
another correction in equity markets.

During the August sell-off, currency carry trades unwound amid changing 
expectations of interest rate paths and heightened volatility. Since carry trades 
borrow in low interest currencies to invest in higher-yielding ones, the unwinding 
caused a sharp, if short-lived, appreciation of the funding currencies, predominantly 
the yen, and a depreciation of the investment currencies, such as the Mexican peso 
and other emerging market economy (EME) currencies. These fluctuations were large 
but not outsize compared with past carry trade crashes, and foreign exchange (FX) 
volatility did not rise nearly as much as that of equity markets. Moreover, even though 
EMEs were exposed to the unwinding of carry trades and spillovers of the risk-off 
mood, they withstood the bouts of volatility quite well.

Fixed income markets in major economies mostly reflected shifts in policy 
expectations and the growth outlook, even amid the turbulence. From July onwards, 
market participants began reassessing the odds of a soft landing. As signs of an 
intensification of the slowdown surfaced in early August, government bond yields fell 
markedly, as investors priced in more aggressive rate cuts. Concerns over a global 
slowdown led to more internationally synchronised movements across bond markets. 
This halted the divergence that had sustained US dollar appreciation since 2021.

Credit markets were the least affected by the bouts of volatility and de-risking. 
Corporate bond spreads did widen across advanced economies, but only marginally, 
and overall credit conditions remained benign by historical standards. Similarly, bank 
credit supply terms no longer tightened. Against this background, broad measures of 
financial conditions loosened. Towards the end of the review period, the risk-on mode 
was again in full swing but still vulnerable to sudden changes in mood.

• 
The unwinding of leveraged positions, including carry trades, amplified short-lived bouts of extreme 
equity market volatility and exchange rate movements in early August.

• 
Equity markets underwent some drawdowns but overall managed to pull ahead fairly unscathed. Credit 
markets were even less affected, amid an overall environment of loose financing conditions.

• 
Markets remained hypersensitive to macro news, especially news that lowered the odds of a soft landing. 
Bond yields declined on any signs of slowdown, particularly at the short end.

Global bond markets price in easier monetary policy

Global bond markets moved in tune with expectations of an easier policy stance. 
Inflation continued its course towards targets, while macroeconomic readings 
indicated that growth momentum might be faltering. Hence, fixed income markets 
started pricing in earlier and larger rate cuts in most advanced economies, causing a 
rather synchronised decline in short-term yields globally (Graph 1.A). This macro 
backdrop also exerted downward pressure on long-term yields, albeit a more 
moderate one (Graph 1.B). As a result, the negative term spreads in advanced 
economies continued to narrow, even turning positive in some economies 
(Graph 1.C).

A major reassessment of policy expectations occurred in early August. Investors 
coalesced around somewhat negative labour market readings, interpreted as 
worrisome given the Federal Reserve’s cautious approach to rate cuts. Fears that the

odds of a sharp downturn were rising ignited the early August turbulence and led 
investors to price in a faster pace of rate cuts (Graph 2.A). A sharp decline in yields 
followed, including at the long end, possibly exacerbated by the unwinding of short 
positions and flight-to-safety flows.2 The macroeconomic releases of the following 
days, however, painted a rosier picture and, together with central bank 
communication, they briefly nudged up policy rate expectations. That said, these 
expectations eventually settled at a lower level at the end of the review period.

Overall, yield movements were increasingly driven by market participants’ 
greater focus on growth-related news (Box A). This reflected inflation being seemingly 
on track towards targets and more prominent negative surprises about activity 
(Graph 2.B). Policy expectations were shaped by the evolving odds of a full-fledged 
recession versus a soft landing. Expectations of a more synchronous policy cycle 
ahead also led to more correlated movements in short- and long-term yields across 
core bond markets, in marked contrast to the divergence that had characterised the 
previous months. In turn, this likely contributed to halting the US dollar’s appreciation 
trend, which had persisted since the initial policy rate lift-off in the United States.

2 
In line with this, various estimates of term premia in the United States point to a sharp decline in 
correspondence with the early August spike in volatility.

Macroeconomic news triggers the repricing of financial assets, partly due to revised expectations of monetary 
policy. The extent to which asset prices respond to macroeconomic news depends on the perceived 
importance of the economic variable for central banks’ monetary policy decisions. This box examines the 
influence of two key economic indicators in the United States – non-farm payrolls and core consumer price 
index (CPI) inflation – on the yield of US Treasury bonds with two years to maturity (a yield curve segment that 
is fairly sensitive to shifts in policy expectations). We find that macroeconomic news has had a growing impact 
on asset prices in recent years, indicating that the Federal Reserve is becoming more data dependent. This was 
already the case amid the post-pandemic inflation surge, when inflation-related news came into the spotlight. 
In the more recent period, financial markets have shown an increasing sensitivity to labour market news.

Recent labour market news has elicited large responses in asset prices despite the moderate size of the 
economic surprise. For instance, on 2 August, when the July non-farm payroll report was released, the two-year 
US Treasury yield declined by 26 basis points, representing a more than four standard deviation change for that 
month. More broadly, during the latest three job report release days, the absolute change in the two-year US 
Treasury yield was close to, or higher than, the median observed in the past two years (Graph A1.A, red dots). 
Meanwhile, the size of the data surprise, defined as the difference between the actual data and the median 
forecast by analysts polled by Bloomberg, was only close to or below the median.

The substantial movements in the two-year yield on recent job release days align with a trend of rising 
sensitivity of asset prices to labour market news. To illustrate this, we estimate the time-varying sensitivity of 
the two-year yield to the non-farm payroll surprise using rolling regressions with 24 months of data. Specifically, 
we employ a weighted least squares regression approach with higher weights assigned to more recent 
observations. Our estimates reveal that this sensitivity has been rapidly increasing since 2023 (Graph A1.B, red 
line). In fact, the magnitude of the latest estimate is near its two-decade peak.

The two-year yield has also exhibited high sensitivity to inflation surprises (Graph A1.B, blue line). Amid 
heightened inflation pressures, the sensitivity of two-year Treasury yields to core CPI inflation surprises surged 
during 2022. As inflation decelerated from post-pandemic peaks, the increase became more gradual and has 
currently plateaued at an elevated level. And as the magnitude of inflation surprises has diminished, the 
corresponding changes in the two-year yield have been limited in recent months (Graph A1.A, blue dots).

What explains the increasing importance of labour market surprises in recent months? The jury is still out. 
One possibility is that, with inflation seemingly on track towards the target, markets anticipate that the Federal 
Reserve will place a greater emphasis on labour market news when making policy decisions. Indeed, in a recent 
assessment of the economic outlook, the Federal Market Open Committee chair acknowledged diminishing 
upside risks to inflation and highlighted increasing downside risks to employment. Communication of this 
type could prompt market participants to update their perceptions about the central bank’s reaction function 
and place more weight on employment conditions. The perceived evolution in the monetary policy reaction 
function could be an important driver of the increasing sensitivity of asset prices to labour market news.

In Japan, policy expectations not only reflected the gradual tightening phase 
under way but also reacted to evolving central bank communication. As the Bank of 
Japan embarked on a monetary tightening in the spring for the first time in almost 
two decades, investors started pricing in higher policy rates ahead. Tighter funding 
conditions in Japanese yen were one of the triggers of the early August turbulence. 
As a result, in its aftermath, the Bank of Japan adjusted its communication to 
telegraph a cautious approach to further rate hikes. This led to an immediate 
downward shift in anticipated policy rates (Graph 2.A), as investors adjusted their 
expectations.

European fixed income markets were less affected by a reassessment of the 
policy path but experienced jitters for different reasons. The jitters came on the back 
of political developments and uncertainty related to elections in the United Kingdom, 
France and Germany. Notably, French credit default swap (CDS) spreads widened 
following the first round of parliamentary elections in June, with the associated 
geopolitical uncertainty affecting other euro area countries more broadly (Graph 2.C). 
Italian CDS spreads also widened, albeit less than the French ones. The CDS on 
German bunds, typically viewed as a safe asset in the euro area, ticked up unusually 
not only following the French elections but also after the elections in Saxony and 
Thuringia in early September. This possibly reflects increasing challenges in the 
political sphere. CDS spreads eventually narrowed for Italian and German bonds but 
remained wider for French bonds.

De-leveraging and carry trade unwinding amplify volatility

Risky assets, already vulnerable given seeping concerns about stretched valuations, 
were those most shaken in July and early August. Still, flare-ups of volatility subsided 
quickly each time, equity markets largely recovered the losses, and credit spreads re-
compressed. In the end, markets eventually reverted to the risk-on mode as investors 
became increasingly convinced of policy easing ahead.

Throughout July, equities were highly responsive to any signs casting doubts on 
the sustainability of earnings, especially in segments that had previously seen a surge 
in valuations (Box B). Indeed, these lofty valuations were the first to suffer in the light 
of indications of possibly fading growth momentum. Those of tech stocks, mostly 
those of the so-called “Magnificent 7”,3 began to drop rapidly in July (Graphs 3.A and 
3.B). By contrast, the “rest” of the S&P 500 index was left relatively unscathed, and 
small caps were even boosted by some investment rotation.

A larger bout of volatility followed in the first days of August. US equities 
resumed losses. Once again, the Magnificent 7, but this time also the riskier small 
caps (Graph 3.B), saw the largest drops. The trigger was investors’ outsize reaction to 
a somewhat disappointing US labour market release on Friday 2 August. On the 
following Monday, the epicentre of the turbulence shifted to Japan, with the yen 
appreciating further and the TOPIX index posting double-digit losses. The sell-off 
broadened, with the TOPIX banks index suffering the worst one-day loss in its 40-
year history (Graph 3.C). The Nikkei implied volatility spiked to crises-like highs (Graph 
4.A). The volatility spike appeared to spill over to the VIX, which briefly exceeded 60 
in pre-market trading before closing under 40, still an elevated level.

The valuations of tech stocks: dotcom redux?

Over the past few years, equity prices have risen steadily, driven largely by the “Magnificent 7” (M7) tech giants. 
While their earnings growth has been strong, the rapid rise in their stock prices raises concerns about whether 
these valuations are driven by excessive optimism about future earnings, potentially echoing the dotcom bubble 
of the late 1990s.

The parallel with the dotcom bubble might seem fitting, as both periods saw a surge in the tech sector’s 
share of the S&P 500 market capitalisation (Graph B1.A). In 2000, at the cusp of the dotcom bubble, the share 
of tech firms in the S&P 500 index reached 47%, doubling from 23% in less than two years. By end-August 2024, 
the share of tech firms had reached 49%, but the increase was more gradual, taking nearly a decade to double. 
These patterns reflect the overall dynamics of equity prices, with the S&P 500 tripling in real terms from 1995 
to 1999, compared with a more gradual tripling over the past decade.

A common way to relate price dynamics to fundamentals is to look at price-to-earnings (P/E) ratios. They 
reflect how much investors are willing to pay for each dollar of earnings. P/E ratios can be calculated in a 
backward-looking (trailing) way, typically based on the past year’s realised earnings, or in a forward-looking 
way, based on analysts’ earnings forecasts. Trailing P/E ratios are grounded in actual results but may fail to react 
swiftly to changes in the outlook. Forward P/E ratios instead reflect expectations of growth, but they risk being 
biased by waves of over-optimism (or pessimism).

Since July, M7 stocks fell by around 25% and have not yet recovered. As a result, their valuations, as 
measured by the trailing P/E ratio, have not returned to levels seen at the beginning of June (Graph B1.B, blue 
line). However, these valuations remain over 45% higher than the median S&P 500 firm. This lingering optimism 
is also reflected in forward P/E ratios, which are, on average, 30% lower than their trailing counterpart.

The rising profitability of tech firms in the current bull market has helped propel their valuations, while 
during the dotcom bubble (1993 to 2001), the average return on assets (ROA) of tech firms steadily declined 
(Graph B2.A). To be sure, profitability levels also differed initially: in the early 1990s, profit margins of certain 
tech firms were sizeable, arguably thanks to still fairly immature markets and little competition. By 2015, the 
tech industry was more mature, with lower but growing profitability.

Despite the increasing profitability of the M7, their valuations may still be stretched. If markets are overly 
optimistic about future earnings, they may eventually be disappointed. One way to assess, ex post, whether 
forward-looking P/E ratios accurately reflect expectations is to compare forecasted and realised earnings. If 
earnings expectations are unbiased, the forecast and realised earnings would be aligned. For the M7, realised 
earnings actually tended to exceed analysts’ predictions from 2011 to 2019; this is reflected in a slope steeper 
than one (Graph B2.B, red dots). This contrasts with the rest of the S&P 500, which shows a flatter slope and 
hence an optimistic bias in earnings expectations (Graph B2.C, purple dots). In recent years, however, the 
relationship between realised and forecasted earnings has changed for the M7: realised earnings during 2020–
24 no longer exceeded expectations as much as before, and forecast errors also started to become more 
dispersed. This reflects both early signs of increased optimistic bias and higher uncertainty around M7 earnings 
(Graph B2.B, blue dots).

To sum up, until 2019, the M7’s realised earnings tended to exceed expectations. But with loftier valuations, 
the likelihood of disappointments has been increasing. A reassuring aspect of the current M7 boom, compared 
with the dotcom bubble, is that price increases and the build-up of optimistic expectations have been more 
gradual and more rooted in rising profitability. That said, the streak of past positive surprises has been fuelling 
increasingly optimistic expectations, which may have become harder and harder to meet.

The large equity market drops, the extreme volatility spike and the apparent 
international spillovers pointed to amplification factors.4 The US news by itself could 
not be taken as an unequivocal sign of a deteriorating outlook, let alone a looming 
global recession, and did not warrant such a market reaction. Indeed, the jump in the 
VIX far exceeded what would have been expected based on the historical relationship 
with S&P 500 returns (Graph 4.B). The spike in the VIX appears to have been amplified 
by purchases of equity index options by traders exposed to volatility. For example, 
various structured products, including those funded in yen, were reportedly being 
hedged using equity options. And some specialised funds established short VIX 
positions while purchasing options on individual S&P 500 company stocks; these 
positions had to be reversed.5 More broadly, the spike in volatility coincided with 
strong deleveraging pressures and margin calls in a number of other asset classes, 
especially speculative ones such as crypto.

The risk-off episode saw large international spillovers. In fact, Japanese financial 
indices had already begun turning south in early July (Graphs 3.A and 3.C), when the 
yen’s appreciation trend had reversed amid rumours of Bank of Japan FX 
interventions. This had altered the incentives for many leveraged speculators. 
Likewise, the equity market volatility spikes in late July and August went hand in hand 
with signs of an unwinding of currency carry trades. This is confirmed by data on 
speculative yen short positions in currency futures. Various hedge fund strategies, 
which had become crowded and more exposed to carry trades for at least a year, 
faced pressures and contributed to cross-asset spillovers (Box C).

The unwinding of carry trades on 5 August coincided with a widespread sell-off across global asset classes, 
particularly those with more concentrated hedge fund positions. Carry trades are leveraged cross-currency 
positions exploiting interest rate differentials and low volatility. Since many funds actively trade across asset 
classes, gaining an understanding of their exposure to the carry trade can provide some evidence about spillover 
mechanisms. We find that the hedge fund sector had become increasingly exposed to the markets that were at 
the epicentre of the 5 August turbulence. Though our data do not cover early August and thus cannot be used 
to directly assess the episode, they allow us to shed light on how vulnerabilities were building up.

We focus on the sensitivity of the returns of various hedge fund strategies to the returns on currency carry 
trades. This is a useful, albeit indirect, indicator of the portfolio strategy of the fund. The higher the sensitivity, 
the higher the likelihood that the fund is actually engaged in carry trades. And even if the fund is not engaged 
in a carry trade itself but some related strategy that shares similar risk characteristics, a higher sensitivity implies 
a higher exposure to losses should carry trade returns suddenly evaporate.

First, ahead of the August turbulence, hedge fund returns on the whole had become more sensitive to the 
proxies for returns on currency carry trades. Following the pandemic and the rapid yen depreciation that started 
in early 2022, the sensitivity of the aggregate index of hedge fund returns to carry trade returns had turned 
positive and continued to increase through this July (Graph C1.A, red line). This is consistent with a pre-
turbulence build-up in hedge fund exposure to the risks of a reversal in carry trade returns.

Second, returns to hedge fund strategies most prone to engage in carry trades exhibited the greatest 
increase in sensitivity to carry trade returns. The returns of global macro and managed futures funds, both 
traditionally recognised as key players in carry trades, exhibited the most significant shifts in sensitivity from 
2022 onwards (Graph C1.A, blue and yellow lines). This supports the notion that the increased sensitivity 
estimated by our methodology indeed reflected an increase in carry trades in the hedge fund community.

Fourth, hedge funds employing some of the most diversified strategies, and hence in theory less subject 
to the vagaries of any single strategy, increased their sensitivity to the very markets that were subsequently 
disrupted. We find that so-called multi-strategy funds did not just become significantly more exposed to the 
risks associated with FX carry trades (Graph C1.A, purple line), they also appear to have significantly increased 
their exposure to Japanese equities. Accordingly, the sensitivity of multi-strategy funds’ returns to the Nikkei 
300 index returns surged over the past year (Graph C1.B, red line), even when controlling for carry trade returns 
(Graph C1.B, blue line). Moreover, one popular strategy pursued by multi-strategy funds over the period profited 
from the discrepancy in option prices on an equity index compared with its constituents. Some specialised funds 
reportedly found it profitable to establish VIX short positions while purchasing options on individual S&P 500 
company stocks. Our results thus suggest that the shadow of the carry trade risk factor was cast on seemingly 
distinct long-short equity volatility strategies.

Fifth, the finding that the hedge fund sector may have been crowding into a common exposure to the carry 
trade is supported by other measures as well. In particular, in the lead-up to the recent volatility episode, the 
number of distinct hedge fund strategy classes positively exposed to the carry trade had exceeded the number 
with negative exposure. Specifically, the (net) number of strategies with statistically significant positive carry 
trade exposure turned positive and increased as a share of all strategy classes (Graph C1.C).

Crowdedness, combined with high leverage, set the stage for the amplification of stress and cross-asset 
spillovers. According to the SEC Private Fund Statistics, multi-strategy hedge funds entered the episode with 
high leverage. Their leverage ratio was 4:1 by traditional measures and 14:1 when accounting for synthetic 
leverage via derivatives. A jump in common risk management metrics at the fund level, notably value at risk, 
likely compelled these funds to reduce exposure, not just in a single affected asset class but across a broader 
range of assets. And when multiple strategies are effectively heavily exposed to the same risk factor, such as 
that underlying carry trade returns, such crowdedness can amplify the tail risk as funds scramble to exit similar 
positions at the same time. During the August event, no major fund failures were reported, as hedge funds 
appeared to have buffers to meet margin calls and had other positions that were “in the money.”

All in all, the August turbulence proved short-lived. Possibly, less-constrained 
and cash-rich investors took advantage of the sell-off, while larger and more slow-
moving positions funded in the yen, proxied with BIS statistics (Box D), may have been 
only partially shed. In less than a week, prices recovered lost ground and investors 
were once again eyeing a soft landing. And, despite the sizeable shock to leveraged 
currency positions, the impact on FX market volatility was not on par with any past 
episodes of market turmoil (Graph 4.C).

Yet another volatility flare-up, albeit on a much smaller scale, occurred at the 
beginning of September. Again, the repricing was triggered by disappointing macro 
releases, painting a gloomier outlook for the US economy. This underscores just how 
hypersensitive markets have become to growth-related news surprises and the 
associated revisions to expectations of the policy stance ahead.

Relatively benign borrowing conditions and tight credit spreads encouraged 
firms to tap primary bond markets. Not least, issuance in the junk segment rose to 
pre-pandemic levels (Graph 6.A). In parallel, the tightening cycle of bank lending 
standards appeared to be nearing an end (Graph 6.B). Corporate default rates 
continued to decline, underpinning a broader easing of borrowing conditions 
(Graph 6.C). That said, in some segments of the US consumer credit market, such as 
credit cards and auto loans, delinquency rates rose further, raising questions about 
late cycle risks.

EMEs withstand spillovers but face macro headwinds

EME financial markets were also tested by the bouts of volatility and carry trade 
unwinding. A number of higher-yielding EME currencies depreciated, especially in 
Latin America, and the contagion reverberated through Asian currency and equity 
markets. Overall, EME financial markets managed to withstand the turbulence. At the 
same time, a weakening growth outlook and political uncertainty in some countries 
also gave rise to headwinds, prompting some central banks to ease their policy 
stance. This was also facilitated by an easier policy stance expected in major advanced 
economies. Chinese financial markets remained depressed, continuing to reflect 
domestic macroeconomic and financial woes.

Investment currencies popular with carry traders, such as the Mexican peso and 
Brazilian real, underwent bouts of depreciation amid de-risking episodes in late July 
and early August (Graph 7.A). The peso also fell steeply in June amid political 
uncertainties (see below). On a risk-adjusted basis, with a narrowing interest rate 
differential and a rise in volatility, Latin American currencies largely lost their appeal 
to currency speculators, as can be gleaned by falling carry-to-risk ratios (Graph 7.B).

In contrast with Latin American currencies, some emerging market Asian 
currencies appreciated noticeably during the August event. Most notably, the 
appreciation of the offshore yuan (CNH) was similar to that exhibited by the more 
traditional carry-trade funding currencies (eg the yen and the Swiss franc). For 
speculators, CNH had become a popular currency to short vis-à-vis higher-yielding 
regional currencies such as the Indonesia rupia and the New Taiwan dollar. As many 
Asian EME currencies have limited convertibility and are traded using non-deliverable 
instruments, the associated speculative bets mainly involved instruments such as 
currency options: CNH options-trading volumes ballooned in the run-up to the carry 
unwind (Graph 7.C).

EME equity markets were also tested by volatility spillovers originating from 
advanced economies. Asian markets were particularly exposed to the Japanese 
equities-led contagion on 5 August. The MSCI AC Asia Pacific Index saw its worst drop 
since 2023 (Graph 8.A). Stock indices of tech-heavy Asian economies were most 
affected, with the Taiex of Chinese Taipei seeing the biggest drop in over 30 years 
and Korean Kospi experiencing the worst decline since the 2008 Great Financial Crisis.

On top of the spillovers of the early August turbulence, EME financial market 
developments reflected ongoing macroeconomic challenges. Key sources of tensions 
were the mounting risks of a global slowdown. Slowing domestic growth also 
weighed on financial markets in some economies, such as China and Mexico. And in 
some countries, macroeconomic challenges were compounded by domestic political 
woes. For instance, the Mexican peso depreciated in June, following the surprisingly 
large victory margin of the ruling party, and further in August, with the scale of the 
announced potential constitutional and legal reforms. The Thai baht, in turn, dropped 
amid fiscal woes ignited by a change in government.

An easier expected policy stance in major advanced economies facilitated a turn 
towards policy easing across EMEs. Falling US government bond yields relative to 
local currency yields, as evidenced by the rise in five-year yield spreads (Graph 8.B), 
led to receding risks of depreciation and capital outflows. In countries where 
disinflation had progressed, central banks had already entered an easing cycle or 
were eyeing it. As a notable exception, investors increasingly expected the Central 
Bank of Brazil to hike rates, amid robust output and a challenging “last mile” in the 
fight against inflation.

B. EME bonds turned more attractive 
as US yields fell

C. Bond yields in China continued to 
fall

3 Jan 2023 = 100 
% pts 
yoy changes, % 
%

spread to the US:
Five-year government bond yield

Credit to non-financial sector (lhs)
10-year gov bond yield (rhs)

The shaded area indicates 1 June 2024–6 September 2024 (period under review).

a Turbulence in the Japanese equity market (5 August 2024).

Sources: Bloomberg; LSEG Datastream; Macrobond; BIS.

Investors were left with some overall question marks regarding the economic 
situation of China. Mainland Chinese markets did not move in tune with other EMEs 
and continued to face domestic macroeconomic and financial challenges. 
Government bond yields in China reached record lows and remained under 
downward pressure due to a slowing economy, falling prices and the associated 
policy easing. Furthermore, private savings had been increasingly channelled into 
Chinese government bonds, amid the shrinking set of attractive investment 
alternatives with faltering credit growth and a lacklustre stock market. Against this 
backdrop, Chinese authorities reportedly intervened in the bond market to try to put 
a floor under falling yields, as the latter approached 2% in August (Graph 8.C).

BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024 
15

Sizing up carry trades in BIS statistics

Tracking the size of carry trades and the entities involved is notoriously difficult. While BIS statistics record total 
amounts of yen borrowed from banks or via foreign exchange (FX) derivatives, they do not reveal specific uses 
– the carry trade being just one of many. This box explains how these statistics can provide some rough 
indicators of carry trade activity. The figures should be interpreted with care given data gaps and the 
assumptions used.

A carry trade is a leveraged cross-currency position designed to take advantage of interest rate differentials 
and low volatility. The strategy involves borrowing funds at a low interest rate in one currency (the funding 
currency) and buying a higher-yielding asset in another (the target currency). In recent years, low interest rates 
for the Japanese yen relative to other currencies have made the yen a funding currency of choice (Box C). The 
use of leverage makes these positions sensitive to changes in exchange rates, interest rates and volatility.

There are several ways to implement a carry trade, each with different implications for what can be seen in 
international statistics. The textbook case involves borrowing the funding currency, selling it spot and investing 
the proceeds in an asset denominated in the target currency. This is recorded as debt (eg bank loans) owed in 
the funding currency. The more common approach used by hedge funds and other speculators relies on 
derivatives – eg FX forwards, swaps and options – to establish an open forward payment obligation in the 
funding currency. An outright forward position to deliver yen at maturity is a bet on yen depreciation. Borrowing 
yen in an FX swap to sell yen spot is an attractive alternative, given the depth of FX swap markets. Since the use 
of derivatives requires no on-balance sheet borrowing of the funding currency, it is difficult to trace the trade 
in the statistics.

Despite these limitations, the BIS international banking statistics (IBS) and over-the-counter (OTC) 
derivatives statistics shed some indirect light on carry trade activity. This is because they provide a currency 
breakdown of banks’ on-balance sheet positions and of outstanding amounts in FX derivatives markets, 
respectively. Consider on- and off-balance sheet yen borrowing in turn.

The IBS show a sustained rise in on-balance sheet yen borrowing over the past few years, an increase that 
may – but need not – be linked to carry trades. Banks’ yen-denominated claims – which include loans, holdings 
of debt securities and derivatives with a positive market value – on non-banks resident outside of Japan reached 
$880 billion, or ¥133 trillion, in Q1 2024 (up from ¥110 trillion in Q4 2021). The bulk of these claims are on 
borrowers in the Cayman Islands, mainly non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs). Special purpose vehicles located 
there issue debt securities purchased mainly by banks located in Japan. Such financing structures, however, have 
been in place for decades (Dixon (2001)) and have shown modest growth of late, so that they may not be 
related to speculative carry trade positions. Banks’ yen-denominated loans to non-banks outside of Japan have 
grown noticeably, in particular since mid-2021. Outstanding amounts rose from $228 billion (¥25 trillion) in Q2 
2021 to $271 billion (¥41 trillion) in the most recent data for Q1 2024. (The depreciation of the yen between 
then and Q2 2024 would put that value at roughly $250 billion.) These loans were mainly to borrowers located 
in the United Kingdom, the Cayman Islands and the United States. Without more detailed data, however, it 
remains unclear whether this relates to carry trades.

What about information gleaned from the BIS derivatives statistics, the instrument more likely to be 
involved in carry trades? These statistics show that the notional value of outstanding FX swaps, forwards and 
currency swaps with the yen on one side has grown to $14.2 trillion (¥1,994 trillion) by end-2023, up 27% in yen 
terms since end-2021 (Graph D1.A). FX swaps and outright forwards drove this growth (red shaded area). The 
bulk of these are used for hedging and liquidity management, but they can also be used for speculative purposes 
(Borio et al (2017, 2022)). While nearly half of the outstanding FX swaps and outright forwards are with “non-
dealer financial institutions” (red line), which includes non-reporting banks and NBFIs, the share specifically 
related to speculative activity is likely to be much lower. For example, using counterparty turnover data, Aquilina 
et al (2024) estimate hedge fund FX forward positions to have been about $160 billion.

An alternative approach to assessing carry trades via FX derivatives is based on the IBS, which provide an

16 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024

indirect and incomplete view of positioning in the markets for FX derivatives. These statistics track banks’ net 
on-balance sheet positions in major currencies, which in turn reveal their net positions in FX derivatives under 
the assumption that they do not run large open currency positions. This is a reasonable assumption because of 
supervisory guidance (BCBS (1980, 2020)). If so, any open on-balance sheet position must be offset by a 
corresponding off-balance sheet position. For example, a bank with a yen funding base can exchange yen for 
dollars via an FX swap to purchase a dollar asset; the offsetting on- and off-balance sheet positions shield the 
bank from exchange rate movements for the duration of the FX swap since the exchange rate at which it is 
unwound is set in advance. Currency mismatches in banks’ on-balance sheet positions are thus indicative of 
their (unobserved) net positions in FX derivatives.

To a large extent, banks from different currency areas offset each other’s FX derivatives positions. For 
example, Japanese banks are natural suppliers of yen via FX derivatives (Graph D1.B, orange line): they have a 
domestic yen deposit base but hold portfolios of foreign currency assets and use FX swaps to hedge the 
currency risk. Non-Japanese banks in turn absorb much of this supply by providing dollars and other currencies 
in exchange for yen via FX derivatives. They do so to hedge their own yen-denominated asset portfolios and, 
since the Great Financial Crisis, to take advantage of the cross-currency basis trade (Kloks et al (2023))., Their 
net yen assets, and hence their estimated net yen borrowing via FX derivatives, has grown threefold since 2017, 
surpassing the net supply of yen from Japanese banks (shaded area minus orange line).

Off-balance sheet positions in Japanese yen 
Graph D1

A. FX derivatives outstanding1 
 B. Supply and demand for FX hedges C. Net yen supply and incentives

JPY/USD exchange rate (lhs)
Banks' net plus trustee positions (rhs)4

With all counterparties
With non-dealer financial institutions

1 Outstanding FX swaps, outright forwards and currency swaps with the yen on one side (notional value), corrected for inter-dealer double-
counting. Non-dealer financial institutions include non-reporting banks and non-bank financial institutions. 2 See Kloks et al (2023) for 
derivation. 3 Foreign currency holdings in trustee accounts managed by Japanese banks on behalf of third parties, assuming that 80% of 
the total is hedged for currency risk. 4 The difference between the estimated supply of yen (green line plus orange line in Graph D1.B) and
the observed bank demand for yen (tan shaded area).

Sources: Bank of Japan; Bloomberg; JPMorgan Chase; LSEG Datastream; BIS international banking statistics; BIS OTC derivatives statistics; BIS 
Triennial Central Bank Survey; authors’ calculations.

Non-banks also use FX derivatives, but here the picture provided by the IBS is far less complete. These 
statistics capture only the assets in “trustee accounts” managed by Japanese banks on behalf of third-party 
investors (ie not on Japanese banks’ balance sheets); they do not capture those of other non-banks around the 
world. Even so, assets in these trustee accounts, which totalled $2.7 trillion at end-Q1 2024, imply a supply of 
yen in FX derivatives when they are hedged for currency risk. More than three quarters of the total amount is 
denominated in currencies other than the yen, and the bulk is likely to be in debt instruments. Assuming 80% 
of these holdings are hedged for currency risk, an estimate of the supply of yen via FX derivatives reached $1.7 
trillion (¥254 trillion) at end-Q1 2024 (Graph D1.B, green line). If only 60% were hedged, the amount would fall

BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024 
17

to near $1.3 trillion (¥190 trillion). Other institutional investors in Japan that hold foreign currency asset 
portfolios on a (partially) hedged basis would add to the supply of yen in FX derivatives, as would corporates 
outside of Japan that issue yen-denominated bonds on a hedged basis. Unfortunately, these positions are not 
observable in BIS statistics.

The co-movement between the measure of net yen supply and the USD-JPY exchange rate suggests that 
speculative investors may indeed have been involved (Graph D1.C). The measure rose by ¥66 trillion between 
end-2021 and Q1 2024, or $435 billion at Q1 2024 exchange rates, coinciding with a significant depreciation of 
the yen (red-dashed line) and rising incentives for engaging in carry trades (see main text).

The IBS alone reveal little more than an indirect picture of the global dealer banks that sit between the 
various types of non-banks with positions in FX derivatives. Better data on the users of FX derivatives and their 
positioning in these markets are needed for a more complete picture. To this end, the BIS is working with the 
Committee on the Global Financial System to enhance the OTC derivatives statistics. Such data would 
complement other market indicators and flow data (see Box C) in the monitoring of carry trades.

The past decade’s low rate environment challenged traditional life insurers’ business models and 
has been a catalyst for ongoing shifts in the sector. To sustain profitability, life insurers have 
increased exposures to riskier and less liquid asset classes. Some have also offloaded risks through 
complex reinsurance agreements, often to offshore centres, partly with an eye to economising on 
capital. Private equity firms have been a driving force behind these trends. They have funnelled 
investment into private markets by acquiring or partnering with life insurers or assuming 
insurance portfolios through affiliated reinsurers. While more diversified investments and greater 
risk-sharing can, in principle, support insurers’ resilience, losses in private markets could 
propagate risks across an increasingly interconnected and complex insurance landscape.

During the era of exceptionally low interest rates, from the aftermath of the Great 
Financial Crisis (GFC) until late 2021, life insurers’ traditional business model 
encountered significant challenges. Low rates undermined the sustainability of legacy 
insurance policies that promised high guaranteed rates of return. Furthermore, 
subsequent reductions in guarantees, introduced to mitigate pressure on returns, 
dampened demand for new policies.

Pressure on traditional business lines contributed to reshaping the life insurance 
landscape by accelerating two interrelated trends (eg IAIS (2023, 2022)). First, by 
reducing profit margins, low rates intensified insurers’ efforts to develop risk-sharing 
strategies to cut costs and economise on capital. These efforts spurred the transfer 
of risks to affiliated or non-affiliate insurers, often located in offshore centres, and 
insurers’ divestment from traditional business lines (eg policies offering guarantees).

• 
Years of exceptionally low interest rates accelerated ongoing trends in the life insurance sector, raising 
insurers’ exposure to more risky and less liquid assets.

• 
Offshore reinsurance, potentially leveraging regulatory differences across jurisdictions, has surged in 
some regions, leading to an increasingly interconnected and complex life insurance landscape.

• 
Private equity firms have been a driver of these trends by facilitating insurers’ investment in private 
markets and acquiring insurance portfolios through affiliated reinsurers.

Second, by intensifying investors’ search for yield, low rates underpinned the growth 
of private markets. Life insurers increasingly invested in these markets to raise and 
diversify returns, investing in riskier and less liquid assets. These trends have 
continued, and are poised to continue, even as higher interest rates have mitigated 
pressure on profit margins.

Private equity (PE) firms have been a driving force behind these trends. By 
acquiring or partnering with insurers, these firms have been instrumental in 
channelling insurers’ investments into private markets and other alternative asset 
classes. PE firms have also contributed to insurers’ rising reliance on asset-intensive 
reinsurance (AIR). In these complex reinsurance agreements, life insurers fully or 
partly owned by PE firms (“PE-linked life insurers”)2 assume part of the liabilities from 
other life insurers in exchange for the assets backing them.

The entry of PE firms has provided an additional source of capital to the life 
insurance sector but the associated changes to insurers’ business models also raise 
risks. These risks are more likely to materialise in the higher interest rate environment 
that has followed the recent global inflation flare-up. Over the past decade, PE firms 
have made significant investments in the insurance sector and have relied on their 
investment expertise to boost insurers’ profitability. This has mitigated the impact on 
policyholders of traditional life insurers’ divestment by allowing insurers to offer their 
policies at more attractive prices. However, life insurers’ increased exposure to more 
risky and illiquid assets raises the risk of losses and vulnerability to sudden liquidity 
needs, while growing reliance on AIR raises concerns about interconnectedness and 
complexity.

The interest rate environment impacts the financial condition of life insurers in 
important ways. Life insurers are typically exposed to a decline in interest rates due 
to a negative duration gap (Farkas et al (2023b)): the duration of their assets is 
generally shorter than that of their liabilities. The duration gap fluctuates with 
movements in long-term interest rates due to negative convexity (eg Domanski et al 
(2017)). A fall in interest rates raises the value of the technical provisions by more 
than that of the assets.5 This leads to a gap on the asset side (Graph 1.B, red “gap”) 
that depletes capital, even though accounting rules may shield insurers from having 
to recognise the loss immediately in the balance sheet (eg Ellul et al (2015)). In 
addition, persistently low interest rates reduce insurers’ future revenue from new fixed 
income investments that they make to match their liabilities, weighing on life insurers’ 
profit margins.

Accordingly, stock market valuations of many life insurers underperformed 
relative to the broader market throughout much of the low-for-long era. This put 
pressure on insurers to adjust their business models (Graph 2.A).

Adjustments to sustain return-on-equity focused on intensifying efforts to 
reduce technical provisions and economise on capital, especially for capital-intensive 
businesses. In this context, some life insurers have increased offerings of unit-linked 
products,6 which shift the investment risk to the policyholders and reduce technical 
provisions while generating fee-based income (“capital-light” business). Importantly, 
some have also relied on AIR.

AIR – also sometimes referred to as “funded reinsurance” – seeks to free up capital of 
life insurers by transferring risks associated with capital-intensive policies to other 
insurers. Under an AIR agreement, the reinsurer (ie the insurer providing reinsurance) 
assumes all risks from the cedant (ie the insurer obtaining reinsurance). These risks 
comprise those inherent in the issued policies (eg mortality, longevity, contractual 
guarantees)7 and those related to the assets (eg credit risk, market risk) that back the 
policies. Following mutually agreed investment guidelines, the reinsurer manages the 
assets, which are typically held in a custody account and pledged as collateral to the 
cedant.8

Consistent with life insurers’ incentives to divest from capital-intensive business, 
reinsurance activity has grown significantly in major insurance markets over the past 
decade (IAIS (2023), Moody’s (2023)). In the United States, where detailed data are 
available, major life insurers had ceded reserves to the tune of $2.1 trillion at end-
2023, roughly equivalent to no less than one quarter of their total assets, and up from 
around $500 billion in 2017 (Graph 2.B). Around 40% of ceded risks were assumed by 
reinsurers in offshore centres, nearly three times the share reported in 2017 (see also 
Graph 5).

AIR can serve several objectives (IAIS (2023)). First, when the risk is transferred 
across affiliates of the same group, it allows the group to centralise asset and capital 
management. This, in turn, can help cut costs and enhance operational efficiency. 
Moreover, groups may wish to bundle risks at entities that operate in financial hubs 
with significant insurance activity, helping the group in raising capital to support its 
reinsurance activities more efficiently.

Second, cross-jurisdictional AIR can leverage differences in corporate and 
dividends taxation, valuation of technical provisions and capital requirements. An 
illustrative example lays out the mechanism. Building on the stylised balance sheet in 
Graph 1.A, consider a hypothetical life insurer that holds a block (portfolio) of life 
insurance policies, for which it books technical provisions and holds capital to meet 
regulatory requirements. The sum of technical provisions and capital requirements 
determines the amount of assets the insurer needs to hold to back these liabilities 
(so-called “total asset requirement”, see Graph 1.A). In some jurisdictions, as in the 
illustrative example, the regulatory framework may prescribe a lower valuation of 
technical provisions for the same block, due to lower assumptions on expected cash 
flows and/or a higher discount rate. In addition, regulation may also grant greater 
investment flexibility, imposing less stringent constraints on insurers with regard to 
investments in riskier assets with higher expected yields (eg American Academy of 
Actuaries (2024)). This, in turn, could also raise the discount rate applied to the 
calculation of technical provisions.9 Additionally, the reinsurer’s jurisdiction might 
mandate lower capital requirements.10

Under these assumptions, the cedant and reinsurer could agree on a transfer of 
assets and risks that creates a gain for both parties. The cedant transfers assets 
(reinsurance premium) that amount to less than the technical provisions associated 
with the block of policies (the dashed blue box is smaller than the dashed orange box 
for the cedant in Graph 3.A). This transfer also reduces the cedant’s required capital, 
although some capital will be necessary to protect against the counterparty credit 
risk arising from the agreement (the light green box for the cedant is smaller in 
Graph 3.A compared to Graph 1.A).11 As a result, the cedant frees up some capital, 
which creates an ”AIR gain” (the dark green box in Graph 3.A). The reinsurer, in turn, 
receives the assets, which exceed its total asset requirement because of the lower 
technical provisions (the orange box in Graph 3.B) and required capital (light green 
box in Graph 3.B) that apply in its jurisdiction. This difference creates an “AIR gain” 
for the reinsurer (dark green box in Graph 3.B).

9 
Indeed, reinsurers to AIR agreements are typically domiciled in jurisdictions that allow insurance 
companies to make more favourable assumptions about the cash flows of the block. For example, 
the reinsurer could assume that policyholders are more likely to let the policy lapse, which would 
lead to the termination of the policy and decrease expected cash flows.

Third, AIR agreements can be motivated by the reinsurer’s ability to generate 
higher returns on the assets that back the deal compared to the cedant. Reinsurers 
stress this greater ability as a key profit driver (IAIS (2023)). In this regard, AIR differs 
from more conventional reinsurance in the life insurance sector, which focuses on 
assuming mortality and longevity risks (ie is driven by the liability side) to leverage 
diversification benefits for the reinsurer. It is in this context that PE firms have greatly 
expanded their footprint in the life insurance sector.

PE firms’ investment in the life insurance sector has surged over the past 14 years. 
Cumulative investment has grown nearly sevenfold since 2010, outpacing by a large 
margin the growth rates of total PE investment in other firms, including financials 
(Graph 4.A). Investment activity has remained concentrated in the US market 
(Graph 4.B), consistent with the dominance of US-based PE firms (Cortes et al (2023)). 
Investment in other regions has expanded more gradually, with the share of PE firms’ 
ownership of life insurers’ equity still lagging behind the levels prevailing in the 
United States (Graph 4.C).

A range of factors have driven PE firms’ greater involvement in the sector. One, 
as discussed above, has been traditional life insurers’ efforts to divest from their 
capital-intensive business, providing an ample supply of blocks of legacy policies to 
take over. Related to this, many life insurers’ depressed stock market valuations 
offered attractive investment opportunities. At the same time, PE firms benefited from 
large inflows of funds, which, combined with cheap leverage, provided them with the 
financial capacity to invest at scale. The widespread search for yield, including by 
institutional investors such as life insurance companies themselves (Kaufmann et al 
(2024), Farkas et al (2023a)), strengthened this trend.

There are three main benefits to be gained by PE firms acquiring or partnering 
with life insurance companies. First, PE firms can channel the largely predictable cash 
flows from insurance premiums into assets originated by PE firms, such as structured 
credit, direct lending and infrastructure. For PE firms, this generates fixed income from 
fees related to originating and managing the assets. In line with this benefit, PE-linked 
insurers were twice as likely to invest in assets originated by PE firms compared to 
other insurers.12

Second, PE firms have proven more effective in exploiting opportunities arising 
from cross-jurisdictional differences in regulatory frameworks and corporate taxation

to boost life insurers’ profits (Kirti and Sarin (2024)). One way to capitalise on these 
opportunities is by ceding risk from affiliated life insurance companies (ie entities that 
are part of the same group) to an affiliated reinsurer located in a jurisdiction with 
lower technical provisioning and capital requirements, or more favourable tax rules. 
Consistent with this, PE-linked life insurers in the United States had ceded risk to 
affiliated insurers equivalent to almost half of their total assets (or nearly $400 billion) 
by the end of 2023, compared to less than 10% of total assets for other US life 
insurers. About two thirds of the risks ceded by PE-linked life insurers were assumed 
by affiliate reinsurers with links to PE located in offshore centres (indicated by the red 
flow in Graph 5 from PE-linked cedants to offshore affiliate reinsurers). Onshore 
affiliates assumed only about 10% (yellow flow from PE-linked cedants to onshore 
affiliate reinsurers). Other reinsurers, predominantly companies in onshore locations 
without links to PE firms, accounted for most of the remainder. Moreover, reinsurers 
with links to PE firms assumed more than 20% of the risks ceded by other US life 
insurers, of which half was moved offshore (blue flows from other cedants to PE-linked 
offshore or onshore non-affiliate reinsurers, respectively).

Third, PE firms can leverage their investment expertise and management 
capacity. This allows them to give a boost to life insurers’ returns. They do so by 
directing their investment in often opaque private markets, where they have a 
comparative advantage in assessing credit and liquidity risks. In line with this, 
PE-linked insurers’ investments are often less liquid and more difficult to value, with 
notably larger shares allocated to structured credit (IMF (2024), Cortes et al (2023)). 
Granted, these investments may be well suited to match the long-term commitments

to policyholders. Even so, valuation uncertainty could mask the accumulation of 
unrealised losses. Furthermore, elevated exposure to liquidity risk could raise these 
insurers’ vulnerability to unexpected outflows. A prominent example was the self-
reinforcing acceleration of surrenders that followed the rise in interest rates and 
resulted in the failure of a PE-linked European life insurer in early 2023 (BIS (2024)).

The ability of PE-linked life insurers to generate excess returns for their 
shareholders has depended on the interest rate environment. While interest rates 
were low, the mean returns of shares of PE-linked insurers were more than twice as 
large as those of their peers (Graph 6.A). Their risk-adjusted returns were also higher, 
with Sharpe ratios around 50% larger. However, PE-linked insurers had larger market 
betas, indicating higher exposure to market downturns.13 This is also consistent with 
their greater risk appetite and funding cost on their issued bonds as well as the 
assumption of higher tail risks, as indicated by their stock price VaR.

Accordingly, the higher risk of PE-linked insurers’ assets started to become more 
visible when interest rates rose. In contrast to their peers, the volatility and betas of 
PE-linked insurers stayed elevated, and their risk-adjusted returns fell while still 
exhibiting larger tail risks (Graph 6.B).

Life insurers’ rising reliance on AIR, increased exposure to private markets and 
growing interconnections with PE firms raise several concerns for financial stability 
and challenges for supervision.

Reinsurance chains have become more complex. The life insurance sector has 
become more interconnected, with rising amounts of risks migrating across entities

and jurisdictions.14 It has therefore become more difficult to assess how risks could 
propagate through the system, highlighting the importance of rigorous group-wide 
supervision, systemic risk analysis and international cooperation.

If unaddressed by group-wide supervision, cross-border AIR could raise 
particular challenges. For one, differences in legal or regulatory frameworks across 
jurisdictions could represent obstacles for cedants (who remain liable to 
policyholders) in recapturing assets if the AIR contract is terminated or the reinsurer 
fails.15 The reversion of assets and risks to the cedant also weakens its capital ratio as 
the agreement’s capital relief is undone. And the cedant could be left with assets for 
which it lacks management capabilities or which do not comply with internal or 
regulatory requirements. Both these effects could prompt cedants to dispose of such 
assets at scale.

In addition, AIR agreements may result in the same amount of risk being backed 
by less capital and in riskier assets. Reinsurers that benefit from lower total asset 
requirements (recall Graph 3) enjoy a competitive advantage because they can offer 
lower reinsurance premiums. Moreover, reinsurers have an incentive to back the 
assumed blocks with assets that promise higher yields but are potentially riskier if 
they are allowed to use a discount rate for their liabilities that corresponds to these 
higher asset yields, thereby further lowering the present value of the technical 
provisions.

Risks could also arise from increasing concentration. The complexity of AIR 
suggests that these agreements are most economically viable when conducted at 
significant scale. As a result, AIR-related risks could be concentrated in a 
comparatively limited number of reinsurers and jurisdictions (IAIS (2023)). Yet, in 
sharp contrast to the diversification benefits derived from conventional life 
reinsurance by pooling mortality and longevity risk, returns on invested assets could 
prove highly correlated in the event of widespread market downturns.

Conflicts of interest, if unaddressed by robust governance frameworks, could 
raise additional risks. Such conflicts loom large where asset managers, including PE 
firms, have an incentive to allocate insurers’ funds to assets they originate. The risks 
are magnified given the potential for strategic mispricing of illiquid and hard-to-value 
assets.

Some PE-linked life insurers’ greater exposure to widespread market downturns 
could represent an additional risk for financial stability. To the extent that higher 
returns under favourable market conditions are predicated on gaining exposure to 
systematic risk, these insurers could face significant valuation pressures during times 
of stress.

The life insurance sector has undergone significant structural changes over the past 
decade. The migration of risks from life insurers’ balance sheets and the increasing 
involvement of PE firms in some regions have sustained the sector’s growth and

relieved capital constraints during a phase of significant challenges to traditional life 
insurers’ business models, most notably when interest rates remained exceptionally 
low.

These developments have been underpinned by life insurers seeking 
opportunities to raise returns. Leverage in the system, while inherently challenging to 
measure, has increased. Insurance risk is now backed by fewer, less liquid and riskier 
assets. Although the growth of PE firms started on the back of the low rate 
environment, this expansion has continued even as rates have risen. PE activity, while 
still concentrated in some regions, has rebounded strongly in the past few years.

Policy challenges arise in various areas. Supervisory monitoring has become 
more complex owing to cross-border risk-sharing arrangements among or within 
large (re)insurance companies and their connections with PE firms. Gaps in data 
availability hinder this task further. These developments also underscore the 
importance of international supervisory cooperation and internationally agreed 
regulatory standards. Finally, the resilience of the private markets, which expanded 
rapidly under ample global funding conditions, remains to be tested. The higher tail 
risk of PE-linked insurers, coupled with greater investment in less liquid assets, 
suggests that these firms could prove more vulnerable than peers in difficult market 
conditions.

Globalisation is threatened as countries impose trade restrictions, especially against trading 
partners with large geopolitical differences. This feature gauges the impact of this development 
on trade flows using granular bilateral trade data across finely disaggregated sectors. We find 
that geopolitical distance – based on country votes at the United Nations – helps explain recent 
trade dynamics. The impact is sizeable: over 2017–23, we estimate that quarter-on-quarter trade 
volumes grew around 2.5% more slowly for geopolitically distant countries relative to those that 
were closer. We also assess how vulnerable individual countries are to an intensification of 
geopolitical tensions.

The slowdown in global trade, which intensified following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, 
has highlighted threats to globalisation. Since the end of the Second World War, the 
global economy has become increasingly integrated, with trade playing a central role. 
Increasing integration has been an engine of economic growth, allowing countries to 
specialise in the goods and services in which they have a comparative advantage. 
However, rising geopolitical tensions have fuelled concerns about a possible retreat 
from globalisation, sometimes called “deglobalisation”. As an illustration, a popular 
measure of geopolitical risk based on press articles displays a noticeable spike around 
the time of the Russian invasion of Ukraine and has remained elevated thereafter 
(Graph 1.A). Meanwhile, the total value of global trade as a share of global GDP 
peaked soon after the invasion and has declined since (Graph 1.B).

In this special feature, we examine the relationship between geopolitics and trade 
flows. Specifically, we measure the geopolitical alignment between countries based 
on the degree to which they vote similarly at the United Nations (UN) and investigate 
how this is related to their trade dynamics between 2017 and 2023. Moreover, we 
assess individual countries’ vulnerability in terms of imports and exports to any 
escalation in geopolitical tensions.

• 
Geopolitical alignment influences trade volumes: we estimate that between 2017 and 2023 the quarter-
on-quarter change in trade volumes was 2.5% lower on average between geopolitically distant countries 
relative to those that were closer.

• 
By contrast, the sensitivity of trade prices to geopolitical alignment was limited overall.

• 
Managing trade risks from geopolitics is challenging: the countries most reliant on geopolitically distant 
trading partners tend to have limited alternatives for diversion.

We focus on trade data, comprising prices and volumes, for narrowly defined 
sectors across many country pairs. Compared with simply looking at country-level 
trade value data, as is common in other work, our “looking under the hood” approach 
has several advantages. First, it helps us to control for other factors that also shape 
international trade, such as the strength of supply and demand within individual 
sectors in different economies. Second, it allows us to break down the impact of 
geopolitics on trade into its effect on volumes and prices. Third, it allows for a 
heterogeneous impact of geopolitics on trade flows across different sectors. And 
fourth, we can provide an assessment of the vulnerability of different countries to an 
escalation in geopolitical tensions, based on how dependent countries are on others 
that are geopolitically distant and the availability of alternative trading partners, at 
the sectoral level.

Our main takeaways are the following. First, geopolitical alignment influences the 
volume of trade materially. We estimate that the quarter-on-quarter trade volume 
grew by around 2.5% less for geopolitically distant countries relative to geopolitically 
close ones over the 2017–23 period, after controlling for other factors. Second, the

effect of geopolitics on prices received by exporters2 was weaker. We find that the 
direction of the impact was ambiguous, and the size was generally small. And third, 
we highlight the risks to trade posed by geopolitical flare-ups, based on the degree 
to which trade is concentrated on geopolitically distant countries and how difficult it 
is to divert trade from these trading partners. We document that the countries most 
reliant on geopolitically distant trading partners tend to have more limited 
alternatives for diversion, highlighting the challenge of managing trade risks.

While our results are broadly consistent with past studies based on alternative 
approaches using aggregate data (Blanga-Gubbay and Rubínová (2023), Campos et 
al (2023) and Gopinath et al (2024), for example), we also go beyond them in 
important ways. Extant work focuses only on the decline in the value of trade. Our 
approach, by contrast, allows us to go a step further and show that this decline is 
largely explained by a fall in trade volumes; trade prices have contributed little.

The feature proceeds as follows. In the following section, we outline the ways in 
which geopolitical alignment affects trade dynamics and highlight the advantages of 
using granular data. Next, we provide estimates of the effect of geopolitics on trade 
prices and trade volumes. We then explore countries’ vulnerability to any further rise 
of geopolitical tensions, before concluding.

Geopolitical alignment can affect trade flows. This is because countries tend to have 
different trade policies, including tariffs, restrictions and licensing requirements, 
towards geopolitical allies compared with adversaries. The less geopolitically aligned 
two countries are, the greater the likelihood that trade barriers will be put in place, 
and the higher any such barriers are likely to be.

The effect of trade policies on trade volumes to adversaries is likely to be 
negative. Quantitative restrictions (such as quotas or export bans on geopolitical 
adversaries) will directly lead to this outcome. Tariffs can have a similar effect, working 
indirectly through prices. Additionally, these restrictions may lead to trade being 
re-routed through third-party countries, which reduces the direct trade volume 
between adversaries.3

On prices received by exporters, the effect is ambiguous. On the one hand, for 
tariffs imposed on trade between geopolitical adversaries, exporters may cut their 
prices to offset part of the tariff and protect their market share, with the size of the 
cut constrained by their profit margins.4 On the other hand, if some exporters choose 
to exit the market altogether, prices for the remaining exporters could rise, especially 
if adversaries’ and allies’ exports are poor substitutes for each other. Likewise for

BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024 
37

quantitative restrictions: prices from adversaries are likely to rise due to their relative 
scarcity.

Complicating matters, the expectation of restrictions is likely to see adversaries 
move trade forward to avoid the constraints. This would increase trade volumes 
(compared with trade between allies) temporarily. The impact on prices, however, 
could go either way: if importers react more strongly, their increased demand is likely 
to see prices rise, whereas if exporters do, their increased supply can see prices fall.

Taking all these channels together, geopolitical factors are likely to see a decline 
in trade volumes between adversaries compared with allies, with the possible 
exception of a temporary bump before the implementation of anticipated measures. 
For prices, the effect of geopolitics could go in either direction.

We turn to assessing the impact of geopolitics on trade dynamics in recent years. We 
make use of bilateral trade data at the sectoral level. Our primary data source is the 
six-digit Harmonized System (HS) of bilateral trade data from the UN Comtrade data 
set. The data include bilateral export volumes and values (measured in US dollars) for 
around 5,000 sectors at monthly frequency. Following Amiti et al (2024a,b), we 
aggregate the data from monthly to quarterly frequency to reduce their volatility. We 
then compute prices as the ratio of values to volumes. We focus on a sample of 32 
economies. These are the top 50 trading countries (ranked by total trade value) with 
data available every year from 2017 to 2023.5 This unfortunately excludes Russia and 
Korea, among others, due to incomplete data. That said, it still captures any indirect 
effects working through third-party countries.

We measure geopolitical alignment between trading partners based on UN 
voting records. We rely on a distance metric proposed by Bailey et al (2017) that is 
often used in the literature as a proxy for geopolitical distance. Based on observed 
votes, they estimate a time-varying annual measure of each country’s political 
preferences, referred to as its “ideal point”. They then calculate the “geopolitical 
distance” between each pair of countries as the distance between their ideal points 
(Graph 2). The larger the distance, the less aligned the two countries are. Based on 
this approach, country pairs, say, within the European Union are generally very close 
to each other. Conversely, the United States and China both tend to be geopolitically 
distant from many of the other countries in our sample.6

5 
Our country sample consists of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, 
Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, the 
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the 
United Kingdom and the United States.

6 
The geopolitical distance data are available only until 2022. We assume that the value for 2023 is the 
same as for 2022 in our analysis.

38 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024

Geopolitical distance between countries1

1 This heatmap is constructed using 2022 data. The colour of cells indicates the distance between country pairs, with lighter colours indicating 
closer geopolitical distance.

Event study: trade dynamics after the Russian invasion of Ukraine

We can get a glimpse of the role of geopolitical alignment on trade using an event 
study centred around the time of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. To do so, we 
compare changes in trade growth between countries that were more geopolitically 
aligned with those that were less so. If geopolitical distance did not affect trade flows, 
we would expect to see similar trade changes regardless of geopolitical alignment.

We label country pairs “allies” or “adversaries” based on their geopolitical 
alignment. Allies are country pairs whose geopolitical distance is below the 25th 
percentile in our sample each year, while adversaries are those above the 75th 
percentile. See Graph A1 in the annex for our classification of country pairs.

A simple comparison suggests that some trade flows between adversaries were 
diverted to allies. We calculate the change in the average quarterly growth rate of 
trade from the four quarters before the invasion to the four quarters that follow. The 
value of trade calculated this way declined for both groups, but more so for 
adversaries (Graph 3.A).

BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024 
39

Reconfiguration of trade flows following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine1

Changes in average growth, in percentage points 
Graph 3

1 The panels present the changes in average quarter-on-quarter growth for trade value, volume and price, respectively, weighted by values,
between two periods: Q2 2021–Q1 2022 and Q2 2022–Q1 2023. Allies are country pairs whose ideal point distance is below the 25th percentile
in our sample, while adversaries are those above the 75th percentile.

Sources: Bailey et al (2017); United Nations Comtrade; authors’ calculations.

Beyond trade values, geopolitical factors seem to play out differently for trade 
volumes and prices. We observe a significant decline in the average quarter-on-
quarter growth rate of trade volumes between adversaries, of more than 6%; for allies, 
by contrast, volumes picked up by 2% (Graph 3.B). Conversely, we see a decrease in 
the average quarterly growth rate of prices between allies to the tune of 3%, but no 
material change between adversaries (Graph 3.C). This highlights the importance of 
analysing trade prices and volumes separately: focusing on trade values alone will 
miss potentially distinct dynamics of volumes and prices.

The impact of geopolitical factors also differs across sectors (Graph 4). When 
zooming into the bilateral trade reconfiguration for individual sectors, the outcomes 
are very diverse. Take the change of trade value growth, for example: the gap between 
allies and adversaries, not controlling for any confounding factors, varies between 
–70% and +60%. Thus, some sectors saw very large increases in trade between 
geopolitical allies compared with adversaries, while others saw the opposite.

The exercise above provides suggestive evidence of the effects of geopolitics on 
trade dynamics but could be misleading if factors other than geopolitics influenced 
trade patterns. For example, a slowdown in an economy that is geopolitically distant 
from most other countries could lead trade flows between adversaries to decline, 
independent of geopolitics. Further, trade patterns may have been distorted by the 
Covid-19 pandemic and its aftermath. We therefore now move to a more 
comprehensive model that does a better job of controlling for confounding factors.

40 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024

Heterogeneous reconfiguration of trade flows across sectors1

The median value is indicated by a dotted black line; no change is indicated by a solid red line.

1 The panels are created by fitting a kernel density to the underlying data, which is then normalised to match the three-sigma range of a 
normal distribution. They present the changes in average quarter-on-quarter growth for trade value, volume and price, respectively, from 
Q2 2021–Q1 2022 to Q2 2022–Q1 2023, for adversaries less allies. Allies are country pairs whose ideal point distance is below the 25th
percentile in our sample, while adversaries are those above the 75th percentile.

Sources: Bailey et al (2017); United Nations Comtrade; authors’ calculations.

Quantifying the impact of geopolitical distance on trade

To quantify the impact of geopolitics on trade, we estimate an equation that explains 
trade dynamics using geopolitical distance and other factors. We model the growth 
rate of bilateral trade volumes and prices for each of nearly 5,000 narrowly defined 
sectors, based on the geopolitical distance between trading partners as well as supply 
from exporters and demand from importers. We then aggregate these effects across 
sectors, based on trade shares, to calculate the overall impact of the factors on 
bilateral trade.

Specifically, we assume that trade between a country pair, for a given sector and 
time period, can be explained by:

%Δ V୦୧୨୲൫or Δlog P୦୧୨୲൯= α୦୨୲+ β୦୧୲+ θ୦୲D୧୨୲+ ϵ୦୧୨୲,

where the dependent variable is the quarter-over-quarter percentage change in 
volume (V ) or log change in price (P) from country i to country j for sector h in 
quarter t.

Coefficients α୦୨୲ and β୦୧୲ are fixed effects for importers and exporters 
respectively. Including these in the regression is crucial to control for the effects of 
demand from importers and supply from exporters. Intuitively, we assume that a 
change in trade that is common across all exporting countries to a given importing 
country j is related to the demand of the importing country and will be captured by 
α୦୨୲. Likewise, we assume that a change that is common across all importing countries 
from a given exporting country i is related to the supply of the exporting country and

will be captured by β୦୧୲. Using these fixed effects to capture supply and demand 
influences follows the recent work of Amiti et al (2024a,b).7

The crucial coefficient for us is θ୦୲ – the coefficient on the geopolitical distance 
between trading partners D୧୨୲. It provides an estimate of the effect of geopolitical 
distance on trade (volumes or prices). If countries shift trade from geopolitically 
distant countries to geopolitically close ones in a given period, we will see a negative 
θ for trade volumes. If the shift plays out over time, θ will remain in negative territory 
in subsequent periods as well. Similarly for prices: if exporters start to charge more to 
adversaries than allies, θ will be positive, and will remain positive over time if the gap 
continues to widen.

Our approach complements the existing literature. Much of the extant work 
relates trade to the size of the trading partners’ economies and the geographical 
distance between them – the so-called gravity model – augmented by adding 
geopolitical distance measured in a similar way to us (eg Campos et al (2023), 
Cevik (2023), Gopinath et al (2024) and Hakobyan et al (2023)). Ours differs from that 
analysis in three ways. First, we focus on trade prices and volumes separately, instead 
of trade values. Second, we explicitly control for separate supply and demand 
influences at the sectoral level (instead of proxying supply and demand factors at the 
aggregate level using trading partners’ GDP). Third, we analyse growth rates instead 
of trade levels to filter out the impact of time-invariant confounding factors such as 
geographical distance and cultural similarity.

Consistent with our discussion on conceptual drivers above, the impact of 
geopolitical distance on trade volume growth is generally negative: for the typical 
sector, the estimated θ associated with trade volume growth is below zero in nearly 
all periods (Graph 5.A, red line).8 Given the setup of our regression, this continual 
negative effect implies that the gap in trade volumes between geopolitically close 
and distant trading partners widened continuously over the length of our sample.9

The impact seems to be larger when trade policy uncertainty or geopolitical 
tensions are elevated. For example, the largest impact (in 2018) coincides with 
heightened trade policy uncertainty as US-China trade tensions flared. This is 
consistent with Jakubik and Ruta (2023), who find a shift from trading between 
adversaries to allies that is concentrated in uncertain times, as firms took 
precautionary actions given the unpredictable policy outlook. The effect remained 
negative, but less so, in subsequent years, especially during the Covid-19 crisis, but 
then grew again when geopolitical tensions surged after the Russian invasion of 
Ukraine. Somewhat surprisingly, the effect following the invasion is smaller than in 
2018. This probably reflects the fact that trade reconfiguration due to geopolitical 
factors was already well under way before then.

7 
Amiti et al (2024a,b) focus on the price of imports to the US. BIS (2024) uses the same approach to 
assess the effect of China’s exports on imported inflation across a panel of 12 countries.

8 
There is a lot of heterogeneity in the estimated 𝜃 across different sectors, with around half of them 
being statistically insignificant. Following Amiti et al (2024a,b), we include both significant and 
insignificant estimates in our analysis.

9 
This is similar to the finding that the impact of geopolitical distance on foreign direct investment 
(FDI) has increased over the last decade (IMF (2023)).

Overall, the impact of geopolitical distance on trade volume growth is sizeable. 
Throughout our sample, geopolitical factors dragged down the quarter-on-quarter 
growth rate of trade volumes among adversaries by around 2.5% relative to that 
among allies, on average (Graph 5.B, diamonds). After Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, 
the implied gap widened to about –4%.

So what do we gain by controlling for demand and supply factors? If we did not, 
then we would just be comparing trade volumes between allies and adversaries. And 
that could lead us to very different conclusions. In fact, instead of an average effect 
of geopolitics of –2.5%, we would get +1.5% (Graph 5.B, bars). Over much of our 
sample, robust supply from China and/or strong demand from the United States were 
important contributors to global trade volume growth. To the extent that the growth 
was common across trading partners, our approach attributes this to supply and/or 
demand rather than geopolitics. Thus, given that both China and the United States 
are geopolitically far from many of their trading partners, if we did not control for 
supply and demand, it would materially distort our estimates of the effects of 
geopolitics.

The impact of geopolitical distance on export prices, in contrast, to that on trade 
volumes, has been smaller and has tended to fluctuate around zero (Graph 5.A, blue 
line). This partly reflects the ambiguous nature of the impact that trade barriers have 
on prices, as discussed previously. One episode that stands out is 2018, when trade 
prices among adversaries relative to allies increased. That would be consistent with a 
dominant effect from exporters exiting markets due to either tariffs making trade 
unprofitable or the imposition of quantitative restrictions.

Other studies that have addressed similar questions report an annualised 
difference in the value of trade between geopolitical allies and adversaries in the

range of 4% to 22%.10 Our estimate, of around 10% annualised, is close to the middle 
of this range. But our methodology allows us to further decompose the change in the 
value and show that this is mostly explained by a change in trade volumes; trade 
prices, however, remained relatively static, demonstrating the benefits of our 
approach.

Our results highlight the potential risks that geopolitical tensions pose for trade. If 
political tensions were to intensify, this could result in stronger trade restrictions 
between geopolitical adversaries. As a result, the gap in trade volume growth 
between allies and adversaries would probably widen further. But the effects would 
be spread unevenly across countries.

We use our granular data of sectoral trade flows between country pairs to 
construct an assessment of these risks. We view bilateral trade flows from the 
perspective of each of the exporter and importer countries separately and provide a 
sense of their vulnerability.

The risk of individual countries to geopolitical tensions varies and is related to at 
least two factors.

For one, it depends on the extent to which a country may have to divert its trade. 
For imports, countries that source more goods from adversaries are at greater risk on 
this score, since trade with adversaries is more likely to be subject to new barriers. 
Similarly for exports – countries selling more to adversaries are more vulnerable. To 
proxy for the need to divert trade, we calculate a “need for diversion index” as the 
trade value-weighted average of the geopolitical distance between a country’s 
trading partners in terms of each of its imports and exports.11

For another, it hinges on how easy it is for a country to divert its imports or exports 
to other countries. For example, if a country would like to divert its imports of a 
particular good, the options for doing so could be limited if suppliers are 
concentrated in a small number of countries, especially if those countries are 
geopolitical adversaries. Similarly, the ease of diverting exports would be limited if 
geopolitical adversaries dominate global demand. To gauge the flexibility of a 
country to divert trade for a given sector, we construct a measure of sectoral 
concentration for the sector that weights each potential trading partner by their 
geopolitical distance. We then aggregate these sectoral concentration measures,

10 
Most existing results are based on comparing trade within and between different geopolitical blocs. 
For example, Gopinath et al (2024) found that after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, trade between 
hypothetical western and eastern blocs – as in our case, identified from UN voting patterns – declined 
by 12% more than intra-bloc trade, while Blanga-Gubbay and Rubínová (2023) observed a 4% gap. 
Meanwhile, Campos et al (2023) estimated that fragmentation into western, eastern and neutral blocs 
could see trade flows drop by 22% in their base scenario, or up to 57% in an extreme one.

11 
IMF (2023) uses a metric analogous to our “need for diversion index” to measure individual countries’ 
risk from geopolitical tensions to FDI flows.

44 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024

weighted by their trade share in imports or exports, to generate a country-level 
“impediment to diversion index”.12

In interpreting our findings, some limitations must be borne in mind. For 
example, we have focused on risks associated with the composition of trade; for 
economies less dependent on trade, the macroeconomic costs of reductions in trade 
volumes will be smaller. In addition, the ease of substitutability may be poorly 
approximated by actual concentration at any given point in time, especially if 
infrastructure is essential to trade (eg pipelines for natural gas). Similarly, the criticality 
of a product for a country’s economy is not considered.

For a given country, the risks to exports and imports will vary because of differing 
sectoral composition of trade flows and geopolitical distances to trading partners.

We assess individual countries’ risk along these two dimensions, for exports 
(Graph 6.A) and imports (Graph 6.B) separately, using 2023 data. On the horizontal 
axis is our proxy for the need to divert trade, and on the vertical axis how difficult it 
is to do so. Countries further from the origin are those particularly at risk from further 
trade tension escalation.

European countries in our sample appear to have the lowest risk for both exports 
and imports. First, they are geopolitically close to their major trading partners, with 
around 70% of their exports and imports being with other European countries,13 and 
second, they do not have a high share of sectors in which trade is dominated by their

Country risk to further intensification of geopolitical tensions1 
Graph 6

1 Higher numbers along either axis indicate greater risk. The “need for diversion index” is the trade-weighted average of the geopolitical
distance between each country and its trading partners. The “impediment to diversion index” is the trade-weighted average across sectors of 
a measure of sectoral concentration adjusted for geopolitical distance. This measure is computed in a similar fashion to the Herfindahl-
Hirschman index, but with the contribution of each trading partner to the index (which is its market share squared) multiplied by its geopolitical 
distance to the country of interest. See the annex for details. The dashed line represents a fitted linear regression line; the slope coefficients 
are both statistically significant at the 1% level. 2 European countries are: BE, DE, DK, ES, FI, FR, GB, GR, HU, IE, IT, NL, NO, PL, PT, RO, SE, SI
and SK.

Sources: Bailey et al (2017); United Nations Comtrade; authors’ calculations.

12 
Our “impediment to diversion index” requires sectoral data and has not been used before. It is a 
country-specific measure of sectoral concentration (similar to the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index), 
adjusted for geopolitical distance. See the annex for details.

13 
This, of course, means that the level of aggregation matters. For instance, if we treated the European 
Union or euro area as a single entity, their vulnerability would look higher.

BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024 
45

adversaries. The resilience partly reflects European countries’ efforts to reorient their 
imports of strategic sectors and exports towards allies following Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine (Bosone et al (2024)). These countries would have been more vulnerable 
before 2023, considering their heavy reliance on Russia for energy imports.14

That said, our measures are limited by our data: a calculation of their resilience 
before 2022 would have understated the risks they faced, given the absence of Russia 
from our sample.

From the perspective of exports, a few countries are at notably higher risk than 
others. China and Mexico stand out based on the need to divert. This partly reflects 
the fact that, in both cases, their largest trading partner is the United States – a 
geopolitically distant country based on UN voting records. They both face a high 
“impediment to divert” as well, given that, in many of the sectors in which they export, 
geopolitically non-aligned countries are prominent importers. Australia is also 
vulnerable: while it is less geopolitically distant from its trading partners on average, 
some of its exports are in markets where geopolitical adversaries are outsize 
importers. In particular, Australia’s largest export by value is iron ore, most of which 
is sold to China, the world’s largest importer and a geopolitical adversary.

For imports, China, Mexico and the United States appear to be at the most risk. 
All three countries are heavily dependent on imports from countries that are 
geopolitically distant. Moreover, their adversaries dominate the global supply of 
imported goods across many sectors, limiting the potential to divert. For example, for 
China, the United States, Canada and Norway are all adversaries that play a significant 
role in supplying liquefied petroleum gases, a critical commodity.

Managing trade risks from geopolitical tensions is likely to be challenging. For 
both imports and exports, there is a statistically significant positive correlation 
between the need for diversion and the impediment to diversion (Graph 6, dashed 
line). This suggests that countries that are the most reliant on geopolitically distant 
trading partners have limited options to find alternative countries to trade with.

The risks discussed above can be mitigated in at least two ways, but with costs 
and limitations.

First, firms could seek to “de-risk” by reshoring – increasing reliance on domestic 
production, or friendshoring – sourcing from allies instead of adversaries (Cerdeiro et 
al (2024)).15 However, such a process is likely to take time. In addition, reshoring or 
friendshoring are likely to imply welfare losses due to less efficient use of labour and 
capital than under free trade. For example, Javorcik et al (2024) estimate that 
friendshoring may lead to losses to countries’ real GDP of as much as 4.7%. Moreover, 
in some cases sourcing from alternative suppliers is not possible, as when trade 
patterns are driven by the availability of natural resources, for example trade in rare 
earths, lithium and uranium.

A second option could be for countries to adjust their political alignment. While 
we have taken geopolitical distances as a given in our analysis, high economic costs 
of diversion could incentivise a change in political choices of allies and adversaries. 
Kleinman et al (2020) finds that, as countries depend more on a trade partner, they

14 
Note that our calculation of their resilience before 2022 would have further understated the risks 
most European countries faced given the absence of Russia from our sample.

15 
Re-routing trade via third countries can also help to circumvent trade barriers, but this option could 
trigger further trade restrictions, the more so if it becomes popular.

46 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2024

tend to realign politically towards them. However, this process tends to play out only 
slowly, over decades.

Will some countries be able to benefit from trade reconfiguration due to 
geopolitics? It is possible that friendshoring may deliver a boon to certain countries’ 
exports. Mexico and Vietnam, for instance, appear to have benefitted from US-China 
trade tensions. However, to the extent that the increase in their exports largely reflects 
the re-routing of existing trade, the real gains may be limited since the value added 
would be small. And the net benefits of trade diversion would be tempered by weaker 
demand from countries whose growth is adversely affected (Cerdeiro et al (2024)).

Our analysis suggests that global trade has become increasingly fragmented in recent 
years due to geopolitical tensions. We find evidence that countries that are more 
geopolitically distant tend to trade less with each other, all else equal. The risk this 
poses to individual countries varies: countries whose growth depends heavily on trade 
with geopolitical adversaries are especially vulnerable. This is not only because they 
face a greater need to divert their trade from current trading partners, but also 
because they may have more limited options to do so.

Going beyond the analysis in this feature, trade fragmentation is just one aspect 
of a more general pattern of international economic interactions being increasingly 
shaped by geopolitical considerations, sometimes referred to as “geoeconomic 
fragmentation” (Aiyar et al (2023)). In addition to trade, developments in investment 
and technology are also fragmenting. IMF (2023) shows that FDI flows are increasingly 
concentrated in geopolitically aligned countries, leaving some emerging market and 
developing economies especially vulnerable to capital relocation.

Geoeconomic fragmentation has implications for economic welfare. When 
geopolitical factors play a stronger role in economic decisions, this comes at the cost 
of a smaller role for comparative advantage and market efficiency. While some 
countries may come out winners from these changes individually, the world as a 
whole suffers as the gains from economic integration dwindle.

Trade restrictions 
− 
+ 
− 
Importers are forced to purchase from 
higher-priced alternative sources.

Trade tariffs 
− 
−(+) 
− 
Exporters bear some of the tariff cost to 
protect market share, while importers turn 
to higher-priced alternatives from allies 
(high tariffs may act more like trade 
restrictions if some exporters in adversary 
countries 
withdraw 
from 
the 
market, 
pushing up prices).

Measuring risks to trade from geopolitical tensions

This annex describes two indices to measure the risk of a country’s trade due to 
geopolitics. These can be applied to a country’s exports and imports separately, to 
get a sense of the riskiness of each. For illustration, we focus on the risk to a country’s 
exports.

The first index, N୧, is the need for trade diversion of country i. This is the weighted 
sum across all sectors (h) and all exporting partners (j) of their geopolitical distance 
(D୧୨), where the weights are shares of the total value of country i’s exports:

where s୦୧୨= W୦୧୨∑∑W୦୧୨
୨
୦
⁄
, and W୦୧୨ is the value of trade in sector h from country i 
to country j.

The second index, I୧, is the impediment to diversion for country i. This is a 
measure of the concentration of trade across importing countries by sector, but 
where the contribution of each country j’s trade to the index is weighted by its 
geopolitical distance to country i.

Each importing country’s contribution to the concentration index in a given 
sector, S୦఩

ଶ
෢, is given by the square of that country’s share of total trade value in that

sector, analogous to a sectoral Herfindahl-Hirschman index:

To construct I୧, each of these is weighted by the geopolitical distance between the 
two countries (D୧୨), with this sum then aggregated to the country level based on sector 
h’s share of country i’s total exports:

The US dollar and capital flows to EMEs1

Over the past two decades, emerging market economies (EMEs) have shifted their external 
financing sources away from foreign currency bank lending to local currency bonds and equities. 
What does this imply for the drivers of capital flows? We document that the strength of the US 
dollar against advanced economy currencies is a key driver of local currency bond and equity 
flows as it affects global investors’ risk appetite. Moreover, its importance has risen over the past 
decade, in part driven by a growing role of mutual funds among foreign investors. These findings 
may help EMEs achieve more stable external financing.

Since the Great Financial Crisis (GFC), the landscape of portfolio flows to emerging 
market economies (EMEs) has shifted radically. Portfolio inflows have become a much 
more important component of capital flows to these economies than bank lending. 
The growth in local currency bond and equity flows to EMEs has been particularly 
pronounced, while the share of their foreign currency (FX) borrowing (in the form of 
both bond and bank flows) has declined.

What does this change in financing patterns imply for the global drivers of capital 
flows? While a vast literature on capital flows has focused on the role of interest rate 
differentials and traditional proxies for global financial conditions and risk appetite 
(in particular the VIX), recent research has pointed to the role of the overall strength 
of the US dollar as a key driver (eg Hofmann et al (2022) and Bruno et al (2022)).

The current conjuncture underscores the importance of this issue. With some 
EMEs now cutting policy rates ahead of the United States, narrowing interest rate 
differentials between EMEs and the United States are seen by market commentators 
as exerting pressures on capital flows to EMEs. Therefore, it is crucial to understand 
how important different proxies for global risk appetite and interest rate differentials 
are in explaining these flows.

Against this backdrop, we first document the shifts in EMEs’ external financing 
over the past two decades. Then we systematically assess and compare the key drivers 
of EMEs’ external financing across types of portfolio flows and banking flows, focusing 
on the role of the US dollar relative to that of interest rate differentials and other 
proxies for global risk appetite. In doing so, we take care to avoid potential 
identification problems related to the possibility that exchange rate movements 
themselves may reflect EME fundamentals or could be affected by capital flows

• 
Since the Great Financial Crisis, local currency bond and equity flows have become more important 
components of total capital flows to EMEs; the share of foreign currency bank lending, by contrast, has 
declined.

• 
The US dollar as a proxy for the risk-taking propensity of global investors is a more important driver of 
local currency bond and equity flows than interest rate differentials. By contrast, changes in policy rate 
differentials continue to be an important driver of foreign currency loan flows.

• 
The US dollar’s role as a determinant of capital flows to EME local currency bonds has risen since 2015, 
while that of the VIX has diminished somewhat.

themselves. We also explore how the importance of these drivers of capital flows has 
evolved over time.

Two main results stand out from our analysis. As our first core finding, we 
document that changes in the dollar’s strength affect capital flows to local currency 
bonds and equities, but not those to FX bonds and loans. For local currency flows, 
the impact of the US dollar dominates that of interest rate differentials. By contrast, 
the VIX – the most commonly used proxy for global risk appetite – is not a strong 
driver of local currency bond flows, but matters for equity flows. Our second main 
finding is that the sensitivity of local currency flows to the US dollar appears to have 
increased since 2015, particularly for equity flows. By contrast, the importance of the 
VIX as a driver of local currency bond flows has declined somewhat.

What could explain these patterns? The crucial role of the US dollar is in line with 
its impact on the risk-taking propensity of global investors: when the dollar 
depreciates against foreign currencies, local currency assets in global portfolios gain 
in dollar value, raising the risk appetite of investors focused on dollar returns 
(Hofmann et al (2022)). It is also in line with the importance of return-chasing, US 
dollar-based investors. The growing importance of this factor probably reflects both 
the increasing share of local currency asset holdings in global investors’ portfolios 
and the growing share of mutual funds as investors in EME local currency assets.2 The 
dwindling importance of the VIX, in turn, is consistent with its declining role as a 
gauge of global risk appetite documented elsewhere (eg Erik et al (2020), Miranda-
Agrippino and Rey (2022) and Obstfeld and Zhou (2023)). More recently, the VIX has 
also been affected by structured products selling options and thus has become more 
distorted as a measure of risk-taking.3

The remainder of this article proceeds as follows. The first section describes the 
shift in the source of EMEs’ external financing over the past two decades. The second 
provides a brief conceptual discussion of global factors and interest rate differentials 
as major drivers of capital to EMEs. The third analyses the impact of the US dollar, the 
VIX and policy rate differential on portfolio and banking flows, while the fourth 
examines how the roles of different drivers have evolved over time. The final section 
draws some policy implications.

The growth in capital flows since the GFC saw a notable shift in composition from FX 
to local currency. Specifically, the volume of portfolio inflows to EME local currency 
bond and equity markets has become larger than that of FX bond and loan inflows 
since 2006 (Graph 1).4

The share of external financing in local currency bonds and equities has grown 
particularly strongly in emerging Asia and Latin America (where it now stands at 60% 
and 50%, respectively) at the expense of the FX loan share (Graph 2). Notably, from 
2006 to 2014, the share of local currency bond financing rose in all EME regions. From 
2015 to the first quarter of 2024, the proportion declined slightly in Latin America, 
and emerging Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA), but it continued to increase 
in emerging Asia.