1.1 
External headwinds continue to weigh on euro area growth 
15

1.2 
Some fiscal paths may raise debt sustainability concerns 
18

1.3 
Firms face a fragile recovery given external pressures and high 
debt service costs 
21

Box 1 From localised shocks to systemic risks: the hidden threat of

1.4 
Elevated savings bolster household resilience 
28

1.5 
As a recovery in real estate markets gains traction, tail risks 
remain elevated in some countries and segments 
30

2.1 
Steepening yield curves signal growing unease over sovereign 
debt trajectories 
34

2.2 
Compressed risk pricing in equity and corporate bond markets 
40

2.3 
Risk of spillovers across markets as concentration and exposures 
increase 
48

3.1 
An improving near-term outlook for banking sector profitability, 
although some downside risks remain 
51

3.2 
Banks are benefiting from favourable financing conditions 
56

3.3 
Asset quality remains sound in aggregate, but some sectors and 
countries have seen a slight deterioration 
62

3.4 
Liquidity and capital buffers remain ample 
65

3.5 
Preserving bank resilience continues to be the primary goal of 
macroprudential policy in an uncertain environment 
67

4.1 
The non-bank financial sector remains vulnerable to valuation 
shocks 
72

4.2 
Flows into investment funds recover, while hedge funds’ footprint 
and leverage continue to grow 
76

4.3 
Insurance and pension fund sectors remain resilient but face 
valuation and structural risks 
83

4.4 
Strengthening NBFI resilience and deepening EU capital markets
 
86

Box 5 Stablecoins on the rise: still small in the euro area, but spillover

The international environment remains volatile, and the euro area – an open economy 
that is well integrated into global supply chains and international financial markets – 
could face strains ahead. While the acute risk of a widespread trade war appears to 
have abated since May, tensions remain. Also, adverse spillovers beyond the trade 
sphere are possible. Market concerns about stretched public finances, for example, 
could create strains in global bond markets. In turn, this could have repercussions for 
euro area financial stability through shifts in international capital flows and currency 
swings, diminishing the competitiveness of euro area goods and causing fluctuations 
in euro area funding costs.

Global stock markets have reached new all-time highs despite recent volatility, while 
credit spreads are tight by historical standards. Market sentiment could shift abruptly, 
not only if growth prospects deteriorate but also if technology sector earnings – 
especially those of companies associated with artificial intelligence – fail to deliver on 
expectations. Euro area non-bank financial intermediaries would likely suffer losses in 
such a scenario, due to the size and concentration of their US exposures. Liquidity 
mismatches of open-ended investment funds, pockets of high leverage among hedge 
funds and opacity in private markets could amplify market stress.

At the same time, fiscal fundamentals in some euro area countries have been 
persistently weak. Fiscal slippage could test investor confidence, especially in 
countries where political majorities are fragile. A repricing of sovereign risk would be 
more difficult to absorb today than previously due to a gradual shift in the investor base 
towards more price-sensitive investors. That said, financial markets have so far 
accommodated high levels of issuance smoothly, including in more turbulent periods. 
In addition, the banking system has shown resilience to recent shocks, underpinned 
by strong capital, liquidity and profitability positions. Yet rising credit risk among 
tariff-sensitive firms could undermine the performance of bank loans, while growing 
interlinkages with non-banks could expose bank funding vulnerabilities in stressed 
market conditions.

This edition of the Financial Stability Review also includes two analytical special 
features. The first discusses whether the safe-haven properties of US Treasuries and 
the dollar have changed since the April tariff turmoil and analyses the implications for 
euro area financial stability. The second examines the systemic risk arising from 
linkages between banks and non-bank financial intermediaries.

The ECB’s Financial Stability Review has been prepared with the involvement of the 
ESCB Financial Stability Committee, which assists the decision-making bodies of the 
ECB in the fulﬁlment of their tasks. It is intended to promote awareness of systemic 
risks among policymakers, the ﬁnancial industry and the public at large, with the 
ultimate goal of promoting financial stability.

Luis de Guindos 
Vice-President of the European Central Bank

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Foreword

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

Financial stability vulnerabilities remain elevated, given 
uncertainty over geoeconomic trends and tariff impacts

Measures of trade policy uncertainty have eased from their April highs, but 
uncertainty continues to linger, with potential for renewed spikes. Recent trade 
agreements between the United States and several of its main trading partners, 
including the EU, have eased trade policy uncertainty since the previous edition of the 
Financial Stability Review was published (Chart 1, panel a). As a result, market 
participants now consider certain acute risks, such as the resurgence of a global trade 
war, less likely to materialise in the near term. This has supported a modest, albeit 
fragile, improvement in global growth prospects and helped to boost financial market 
sentiment. As such, market focus has shifted from the risk of immediate escalation in 
geopolitical tensions to the longer-term economic and financial effects of tariffs and 
trade frictions, which could have uneven impacts on euro area sectors and countries 
over time. Despite the easing of trade tensions, the current environment remains one 
of elevated uncertainty and, if history is any guide, renewed spikes in trade policy 
uncertainty cannot be ruled out down the road (Chart 1, panel a). Tariff 
announcements, pauses and reversals are still perceived as structural features of the 
global environment.

Chart 1 
Trade policy uncertainty could surge again, while structural risks stemming from fiscal 
sustainability and broader geoeconomic shifts are growing

a) Trade policy uncertainty 
b) Current account and fiscal balances in the 
euro area and major advanced economies

(8 Nov. 2016-2 Nov. 2020, 5 Nov. 2024-17 Nov. 2025; indices) 
(average values over 2025-27, percentages of GDP)

Sources: Caldara et al.*, European Commission and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel b: balances are calculated as a three-year average of the forecasts for 2025, 2026 and 2027. The vertical red line marks the 
3% of GDP budget deficit threshold set in the Maastricht Treaty. The horizontal red line shows the indicative threshold for the current 
account deficit form the European Commission’s macroeconomic imbalance procedure scoreboard. The blue dots represent euro area 
countries, while the yellow dots represent major advanced economy peers. 
*) Caldara, D., Iacoviello, M., Molligo, P., Prestipino, A. and Raffo, A., “The economic effects of trade policy uncertainty”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, Vol. 109, January 2020, pp. 38-59.

Beyond trade, exposure to risk spillovers from the United States has emerged 
as a key macro-financial vulnerability. Market concerns over US fiscal credibility 
have risen on the back of persistently high fiscal deficits, expectations of higher debt

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

service costs and high borrowing needs, and are compounded by a considerable 
current account deficit (Chart 1, panel b). These concerns over long-term debt 
sustainability and the external financing required to fund the US twin deficit have 
steepened yield curves. Together with market worries about central bank 
independence, these developments have weakened the safe-haven properties of US 
Treasuries and weakened the US dollar. Typically, exchange rate movements tend to 
offset the impact of tariffs, but a depreciating dollar is likely to amplify US tariff impacts 
on euro area exporters, as the euro area is a very open economy which is well 
integrated into global supply chains. These dynamics highlight the risk that global 
financial conditions – largely shaped by US capital markets where the floor for the 
global real interest rate tends to be set – could pose challenges for euro area financial 
stability through disorderly currency swings, adverse effects on trade competitiveness 
and fluctuations in funding costs for sovereigns, firms and banks. A further 
reassessment of the risk profile of US assets – reminiscent of the tariff turmoil in April 
– could trigger significant shifts in global capital flows, with wide-reaching implications 
for the global financial system (see Special Feature A). Moreover, the potential for 
policy shocks to disrupt the international order poses significant risks of geoeconomic 
and regulatory fragmentation across the globe, while ongoing geopolitical tensions 
further increase the likelihood of more frequent and impactful adverse tail events.

In this context, three main sources of risk and vulnerability emerge as central to 
euro area financial stability. First, stretched valuations in increasingly concentrated 
asset markets raise the risk of sharp, correlated price adjustments. Should they occur, 
such sudden market drawdowns could pose balance sheet challenges for euro area 
non-banks, given their persistent liquidity and leverage vulnerabilities, increasing the 
risk of fire sales which could amplify market stress. Opaque private markets could also 
be a source or amplifier of market downturns. Second, fiscal challenges in some 
advanced economies could test investor confidence, possibly triggering stress in 
sovereign bond markets. Third, although banks have demonstrated resilience to 
recent shocks, credit risk exposures to the tariff-sensitive segment of the corporate 
sector could yet undermine the performance of bank loans, while growing 
interlinkages with non-banks could expose bank funding vulnerabilities in stressed 
market conditions. The potential for these vulnerabilities to materialise simultaneously 
given common triggers, possibly amplifying each other further, increases the risks to 
euro area financial stability.

High valuations carry the risk of sharp adjustments that 
could challenge and be amplified by non-banks

Financial markets, notably equity markets, remain vulnerable to sharp 
adjustments due to persistently high valuations and increasing market 
concentration. Global stock markets rebounded swiftly from their early April lows, 
repeatedly reaching all-time highs in recent months (Chart 2, panel a). This renewed 
risk-on sentiment, which drove already high valuations even higher, was the result of 
perceptions of diminishing trade tensions, strong corporate earnings, growing 
expectations of further monetary policy easing in the United States and continued

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

optimism surrounding the productivity-boosting potential of artificial intelligence (AI). 
At the same time, market concentration among, and interconnection between, a 
handful of large US-based tech firms has risen further (Chart 2, panel b). This leaves 
global public markets − and increasingly also private markets − exposed to risks 
stemming from potential shocks to these firms (see Section 2.3). Unlike the asset 
price inflation seen during the dotcom bubble in 2000, which pushed the valuations of 
unprofitable firms to levels that were hard to explain, these “hyperscalers” combine 
high profit margins, strong earnings growth, little debt and diversified underlying 
businesses beyond AI, explaining their high current valuations. Beyond equity 
markets, credit spreads remain compressed. Meanwhile, less mainstream asset 
classes like crypto-assets remain highly volatile and show greater interconnectedness 
with the traditional financial system, with total crypto market capitalisation reaching 
short-lived new highs and stablecoin use growing (see Box 5).

Chart 2 
High valuations and increasing risk concentration render financial markets and 
non-bank portfolios vulnerable to the risk of sudden price adjustments

a) Evolution of crypto-assets 
and global equity markets

b) Share of top ten S&P 500 
firms in market capitalisation 
and net income, and euro area 
non-banks’ US exposures

c) Weighted average equity 
price/earnings ratio and bond 
spreads in euro area non-bank 
portfolios

(1 Jan. 2024-18 Nov. 2025, indices: 
1 Jan. 2024 = 100) 
(1 Jan. 2007-18 Nov. 2025, percentages) 
(Q1 2015-Q2 2025; ratio, percentage 
points)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., LSEG, ECB (SHS, ICB, IVF, PFBR) and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: “Crypto-assets” refers to the Bloomberg Galaxy Crypto Index which is a benchmark designed to measure the price 
performance in US dollars of the largest cryptocurrencies. “Global equity markets” refers to the MSCI ACWI index, which measures the 
performance of large- and mid-cap stocks across both developed and emerging markets worldwide. Panel b: euro area non-bank 
holdings of US securities are shown as a share of total assets. Panel c: the price/earnings ratio calculation is limited to non-bank holdings 
within the S&P 500, EURO STOXX 600, Nikkei 225 and FTSE 100 indices, accounting for their changing compositions over time. The 
metric used is the 12-month forward price/earnings ratio. The spreads are calculated as the difference between an individual security’s 
yield to maturity and a corresponding benchmark rate. Euro-denominated holdings are benchmarked against the euro area ten-year 
government benchmark bond yield while US dollar and all other currency holdings are benchmarked against the ten-year US Treasury 
yield. Each security’s yield is compared with a common ten-year benchmark, regardless of its individual maturity.

The apparent disconnect between prevailing economic policy uncertainty and 
benign market pricing leaves room for sudden shifts in sentiment. Current 
market pricing does not appear to reflect persistently elevated vulnerabilities and 
uncertainties. One possible explanation is that this might be based on optimism that 
tail risks will not materialise. Alternatively, it may reflect fears of missing out on a

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Overview

continued rally, as markets have proved to be resilient to recent shocks, or it could be 
related to an increasingly complex and hard-to-price risk environment (see 
Section 2.2). Negative surprises – including sharply deteriorating economic growth 
prospects, a re-escalation of trade and geopolitical tensions, market concerns over 
central bank independence and US fiscal credibility, or disappointing news on AI 
adoption and associated corporate earnings expectations – could trigger abrupt 
sentiment shifts, with spillovers across asset classes and geographies.

High valuations and risk concentration, coupled with liquidity and leverage 
vulnerabilities, could challenge non-banks’ balance sheets and amplify market 
stress via forced asset sales. Overall, non-banks navigated the April tariff turmoil 
relatively well, remaining a key source of funding for the real economy and euro area 
sovereigns. Fund flows of European investors into risky assets have rebounded, with 
a notable shift towards shorter maturities and some further evidence of diversification 
towards euro area assets (see Section 4.2). That said, the portfolio holdings of 
investment and pension funds reflect buoyant market conditions by showing signs of 
elevated valuations (Chart 2, panel c), exposing these segments to the risk of sudden 
and broad-based valuation adjustments. Exposures in the euro area non-bank 
financial intermediation (NBFI) sector remain heavily concentrated in US dollar assets 
(Chart 2, panel b), increasing the sector’s vulnerability to US-specific shocks and 
exchange rate fluctuations. More broadly, structural vulnerabilities in the NBFI sector 
remain significant. Liquidity mismatches in open-ended investment funds (e.g. 
corporate bond funds) and pockets of elevated financial and synthetic leverage in 
some entities (e.g. hedge funds) could trigger procyclical asset sales and exacerbate 
market volatility under stress through procyclical selling behaviour (see Box 4).

Liquidity and leverage vulnerabilities in the NBFI sector merit an appropriate 
policy response as market-based finance expands in terms of size and 
interconnectedness. Recent stress episodes underscore the need to broaden 
monitoring and strengthen the macroprudential framework for non-banks. Progress 
will depend on improving data availability and cross-border information sharing, 
ensuring timely implementation of international reforms and developing a more 
comprehensive toolkit to address the risks posed by NBFI leverage, combining both 
entity and activity-based measures. Improving data availability is particularly important 
in private markets, where difficulties in exiting private equity deals, and credit defaults 
in the United States, have raised concerns over opaque valuations and lax lending 
standards. At the EU level, stronger supervisory coordination, new macroprudential 
tools to address liquidity mismatches and leverage, and the development of 
system-wide stress testing would help reinforce resilience. Accelerated efforts to 
advance the savings and investments union in parallel, by deepening equity markets, 
mobilising retail and institutional savings and enhancing integrated supervision, will be 
essential for supporting growth and competitiveness across the EU while 
safeguarding financial stability.

A challenging fiscal outlook in some advanced economies 
could test investor confidence and lead to sovereign bond 
market stress

Euro area sovereigns are benefiting from lower risks to economic growth and 
flight-to-safety dynamics. International trade agreements, including between the 
United States and the EU, have helped reduce near-term tail risks for global and euro 
area growth outlooks. While the long-term economic implications remain uncertain, 
worst-case scenarios appear to have been averted, supporting sovereign debt 
sustainability. In addition, euro area sovereign bond markets have benefited from 
flight-to-safety dynamics following the April tariff turmoil as investors questioned the 
safe-haven status of US assets. Improved fiscal fundamentals and recent sovereign 
rating upgrades in several euro area countries have compressed bond spreads, 
although they have widened in countries facing fiscal challenges and rating 
downgrades, notably France. As a result, bond spreads have converged between 
countries with significantly different underlying ratings (Chart 3, panel a).

Planned defence spending and persistent structural challenges may strain 
sovereign balance sheets in the medium term. Elevated geopolitical tensions and 
hybrid threats highlight the urgency of increasing defence spending to meet the new 
NATO target of 5% of GDP by 2035. Most euro area countries currently fall

substantially short of this figure and limited fiscal space may make it hard for some to 
reach it (see Section 1.2). Necessary defence spending could unlock positive growth 
effects if well targeted. It may, however, further limit the fiscal space needed to shelter 
the economy from future adverse shocks and to address structural challenges 
associated with digitalisation, low productivity, population ageing and climate change. 
As such, there have so far been few concrete pledges to greatly increase defence 
spending.

Fiscal expansion could pose risks from higher issuance needs and funding 
costs. High defence spending and major infrastructure investment plans in some euro 
area countries are expected to boost sovereign bond issuance. Given the 
Eurosystem’s reduced presence in euro area bond markets, the capacity of the 
investor base to absorb this additional supply will be key for ensuring orderly 
sovereign bond market functioning. However, experience has shown that foreign 
investors have proved to be “flighty” in times of stress. In addition, leveraged positions 
by hedge funds on European sovereign bond markets, while more limited than on 
other markets such as the US Treasuries markets, can significantly amplify shocks 
when such positions need to be unwound. At the same time, shifts in the investor base 
are ongoing. There is lower demand for longer-dated debt from some institutional 
investors, notably Dutch pension funds which are moving from defined benefit to 
defined contribution schemes. As a result, investors may require higher yields to 
absorb new issuance or a compressed maturity profile. Market expectations of higher 
government financing needs have already seen yield curves steepen (Chart 3, 
panel b). Rising debt service costs and structural headwinds to potential growth from 
weak productivity could further strain fiscal positions and rekindle concerns about 
sovereign debt sustainability.

Weak fiscal fundamentals in some euro area countries and external fiscal risk 
spillovers could test investor confidence and trigger stress in bond markets. 
Despite the substantial progress that has been made with fiscal consolidation across 
much of the euro area since the COVID-19 pandemic, some countries are still 
burdened by elevated debt levels with high budget deficits expected to persist in the 
coming years (Chart 3, panel c). Fiscal slippage and non-compliance with the new EU 
fiscal framework could yet test investor confidence, notably in countries with more 
fragile political landscapes. In addition, fiscal fragilities in major advanced economies, 
including the recent US budget impasse and government shutdown, could heighten 
sovereign debt sustainability concerns, trigger stress in global benchmark bond 
markets and prompt a broader reassessment of sovereign risk in the euro area. Any 
repricing of sovereign risk could spill over to the corporate and financial sectors via 
higher funding costs and rating downgrades.

Credit risk exposures to tariff-sensitive firms and stronger 
funding ties with non-banks could strain euro area banks

Vulnerabilities in the euro area corporate sector remain elevated as the impact 
of tariffs unfolds, with potential spillovers to the household sector. Euro area 
corporate balance sheets have improved in recent years and indebtedness has fallen

below levels last observed before the global financial crisis. Nonetheless, profitability 
remains under pressure from subdued demand, elevated debt service burdens and 
higher labour costs. Insolvencies have been rising across sectors and countries in 
light of continued weak and uncertain business prospects (see Box 1). Trade frictions 
and the recent appreciation of the euro have compounded these pressures, eroding 
price competitiveness abroad at a time when Chinese firms are increasing their 
exports to global markets due to weak domestic demand. Tariff-sensitive and 
export-oriented sectors, such as manufacturing, account for a large share of total 
value added, credit and employment, implying that shocks affecting these sectors 
could have broader repercussions (Chart 4, panel a). Although conditions in 
commercial real estate markets have improved, real estate firms remain highly 
vulnerable to the ongoing macroeconomic and geopolitical uncertainty given their 
exposure to both international capital flows and local economic conditions. Euro area 
households continue to benefit from high savings, rising real wages, resilient labour 
markets and the marked reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio which has taken place 
over recent years (Chart 4, panel b). However, this resilience could be tested if stress 
in the corporate sector were to push up unemployment or dampen wage growth, 
potentially weighing on household consumption and debt servicing capacity.

Strong investor sentiment and continued earnings outlook upgrades have lifted 
bank valuations, but non-performing loans and provisioning needs may rise as 
tariff effects ripple through the real economy. The stock prices of euro area banks 
have been driven by sustained strong earnings momentum and record profit

distributions (dividends and buybacks) in recent months (Chart 5, panel a), with 
price-to-book ratios rising to new post-financial crisis highs and gradually catching up 
with those of US peers. At the same time, euro area banks’ non-performing loan ratios 
remain near historical lows on aggregate. However, there is continued deterioration in 
some sectors, notably for small and medium-sized enterprises and consumer lending, 
albeit with significant variation across countries. Looking ahead, asset quality could 
worsen for corporate exposures should trade fragmentation increase or economic 
conditions weaken further. These exposures could weigh on banks’ asset quality 
through both direct credit losses and indirect effects, such as knock-on impacts on 
suppliers or a broader macroeconomic slowdown, especially if layoffs undermine the 
debt servicing capacities of households. As such, banks may yet face higher 
provisioning costs should risks actually materialise in non-financial sectors (Chart 5, 
panel b).

The ability of banks to absorb further asset quality deterioration is supported 
by strong profitability and ample capital and liquidity buffers. Euro area banks 
maintained robust return on equity levels, averaging close to 10% in the first half of 
2025, albeit with some cross-country variation (see Section 3.1). Banks’ resilience 
has also been bolstered by capital and liquidity ratios that are well above regulatory 
requirements. Maintaining this resilience is essential in the context of elevated 
geopolitical and trade uncertainty. The 2025 EU-wide stress test confirmed that euro

area banks are adequately capitalised to withstand severe shocks, not least thanks to 
the macroprudential policy measures implemented by the authorities in recent years. 
As such, releasable capital buffer requirements should be preserved, with targeted 
increases considered in countries where releasable buffers are low, provided such 
measures do not pose procyclicality risks. Proper calibration of borrower-based 
measures is also essential to uphold sound lending standards (see Section 3.5). The 
prevailing regulatory and supervisory framework, including in the macroprudential 
remit, has been effective in safeguarding financial stability. There is, however, scope 
for making the framework more efficient and effective by reducing unwarranted 
complexities, without compromising bank resilience or undermining compliance with 
the Basel framework, and by completing the banking union.

Rising interlinkages with non-banks may reveal bank funding vulnerabilities if 
market conditions turn volatile or corporate fundamentals deteriorate. Weak 
economic conditions and elevated trade policy uncertainty may impair the asset 
quality of non-bank portfolios, exposing the non-bank financial intermediation (NBFI) 
sector to the risk of revaluation losses from unexpected downgrades and increasing 
default risk. The importance of non-bank funding for banks has grown in recent years 
(Chart 5, panel c), with the share of volatile, short-term liabilities constituting a 
significant portion of overall funding from non-banks. Some of these liabilities arise 
from intermediation activities and are offset by corresponding asset exposures. 
Funding from non-banks may be difficult to substitute, due to their high concentration 
among a few large banks and the preference of non-banks for specific funding 
instruments. As a result, short-term non-bank funding outflows and counterparty credit 
losses on exposures to non-banks, possibly caused by asset price shocks, could lead 
banks to deleverage. In turn, as banks would then reduce funding to non-banks, these 
entities might need to unwind positions and sell assets. The loss-absorbing capacity of 
banks closely interlinked with the NBFI sector and sufficient liquidity buffers in 
non-banks are thus essential to maintain the smooth provision of financial services in 
times of stress (see Special Feature B). In addition, euro area banks are exposed to 
the opaque private markets via direct lending to private market funds and via lending 
to private market-backed firms.

Financial stability vulnerabilities remain elevated, given 
uncertainty over geoeconomic trends and tariff impacts

All in all, the financial stability landscape continues to be shaped by trade 
policy uncertainty, which despite recent measured declines remains elevated 
and leaves scope for renewed volatility. Notwithstanding reduced uncertainty and 
multiple sources of resilience in euro area financial as well as non-financial sectors, 
vulnerabilities persist and warrant close monitoring. In fact, the macro-financial effects 
of the tariff shock have yet to fully materialise and, together with possible spillovers 
from US-centric risks − notably those associated with fiscal and institutional credibility 
− remain important vulnerabilities. Additionally, it is possible that risk sentiment could 
deteriorate again as some risky asset valuations remain high, with relatively benign 
pricing seemingly at odds with prevailing uncertainties about macro-financial and

geoeconomic conditions. At the same time, sizeable defence spending needs and 
higher funding costs could yet weaken fiscal positions and test market confidence. In 
parallel, credit risk exposures to tariff-sensitive firms and deepening funding links with 
non-banks could add to the pressures faced by euro area banks. Against this 
background, there is a pressing need for accelerated progress to be made on the 
savings and investments union, encompassing both the banking and capital markets 
union. This initiative is aimed at fostering a single, deep and liquid market that will 
contribute to safeguarding financial stability and supporting investment-led growth and 
competitiveness.

Beyond the macro-financial environment, several overarching structural issues 
remain pivotal for safeguarding financial stability and have the potential to 
exacerbate existing cyclical vulnerabilities. These include cybersecurity 
weaknesses and hybrid threats in an increasingly complex geopolitical landscape, the 
growing importance of AI – offering both opportunities and risks of destabilisation 
along the innovation path − risks arising from global regulatory fragmentation and 
deregulation, challenges linked to ageing populations and climate-related risks along 
the way to a low-carbon economy. The potential for these cyclical and structural 
vulnerabilities to crystalise simultaneously and amplify each other heightens the 
materiality of risks to financial stability.

1.1 
External headwinds continue to weigh on euro area 
growth

Lingering global uncertainties are posing risks to the growth outlook in the 
euro area, with trade tensions among the key factors. Tariffs on euro area exports 
to the United States have increased considerably since the start of the year. The 
recent US-EU agreement has capped tariffs for most goods, resulting in a notable 
decline in trade policy uncertainty. That said, it remains elevated by historical

standards and renewed spikes cannot be ruled out (Chart 1.1, panel a).1,2 Persistent 
uncertainty about the longer-term impact of higher tariffs is continuing to weigh on 
global activity, adding to downside risks for growth in the euro area. Exporters in 
particular are facing a challenging environment as subdued external demand and 
intensified competition from abroad erode growth prospects. Beyond its impact on 
direct trade flows, heightened uncertainty may also be weighing on firms’ investment 
plans and hiring decisions.3 This is dampening activity in those sectors closely 
integrated into global value chains, with knock-on effects on consumer confidence.

Growth in the euro area has proven to be resilient over the first three quarters of 
2025 and higher than foreseen in the June 2025 Eurosystem staff 
macroeconomic projections for the euro area. After a strong first quarter driven by 
frontloaded exports and resilient services activity, GDP growth slowed, partially 
reflecting the expected unwinding of frontloading effects. The external balance of 
goods and services has exerted a drag throughout the year so far, while private

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

consumption, government spending and investment have made a positive contribution 
(Chart 1.1, panel b). Meanwhile, inflationary pressures have eased markedly. 
Headline inflation has fallen sharply from its 2022 peak, stabilising close to the ECB’s 
target level of 2% on the back of declining energy prices and food inflation. Core 
inflation has been more persistent but is continuing to moderate gradually, supported 
by easing wage growth and lower services inflation (Chart 1.1, panel c). Disinflation 
has been accomplished in the euro area economy without an associated sharp 
slowdown so far. At the same time, growth has remained positive and is expected to 
recover further in the fourth quarter of 2025.4 However, the outlook could prove 
vulnerable to external shocks like revived trade tensions and a further escalation of 
geopolitical conflicts and domestic challenges, in particular sovereign risks (see 
Section 1.2), that could trigger broader market reassessments.

Chart 1.2 
Euro area business sentiment stabilises as trade tensions ease, but subdued 
consumer confidence limits near-term prospects for domestic demand

a) PMIs for economic activity 
in the euro area

b) Consumer confidence in the 
euro area

c) Households’ gross saving 
in selected euro area 
countries

(Jan. 2024-Oct. 2025, indices) 
(Jan. 2022-Oct. 2025, indices) 
(Q1 2000-Q2 2025, percentages)

Sources: Eurostat, S&P Global Market Intelligence, European Commission, ECB and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: a Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) value above (below) 50 implies an improvement (deterioration) in economic activity. 
Panel b: consumer confidence indicator (seasonally adjusted and demeaned). Euro area 20 (fixed composition) as of the 1 January 2023 
European Commission (including Eurostat) Consumer Survey. Panel c: households’ gross saving as a share of adjusted gross 
disposable income.

Although there are tentative signs of stabilisation in business confidence, 
households remain cautious. The risk of escalating trade tensions, with widespread 
retaliation to the import tariffs announced by the United States, has eased notably 
since the previous edition of the Financial Stability Review, providing some support to 
business sentiment. Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) show a modest recovery at 
the margin. Services and manufacturing remain in expansionary territory, while the 
automotive sector has been volatile and remains fragile (Chart 1.2, panel a). By

4 See “ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, September 2025”, published on the ECB’s 
website on 11 September 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

contrast, consumer confidence is still subdued, reflecting households’ concerns about 
both the general economic outlook and their own financial situations (Chart 1.2, 
panel b). Their spending decisions remain cautious, as evidenced by the highest 
aggregate level for the gross saving ratio ever recorded (apart from during the 
COVID-19 pandemic) across major euro area economies (Chart 1.2, panel c). Indirect 
evidence suggests that the elevated saving ratio may, to some extent, reflect 
households’ expectations that their financial health will not improve in response to 
increased public spending.5 However, these accumulated savings also provide a 
buffer and could underpin a stronger rebound in domestic demand once sentiment 
improves.

Looking ahead, the macroeconomic outlook for the euro area is balancing 
pockets of resilience against sustained challenges. While factors such as 
moderating inflation, a strong labour market and accumulated household savings 
provide the conditions for a gradual recovery in private consumption, the external 
environment is set to remain difficult. US tariffs, an appreciating euro and rising import 
competition from China are likely to continue to weigh on export-oriented sectors, 
particularly manufacturing (see Section 1.3). Investment is also expected to remain 
subdued as firms face weaker profitability and heightened uncertainty. Overall, growth 
is projected to recover only gradually.6 A sharper deterioration in global trade 
conditions, stronger currency appreciation or other shocks that could prolong a 
persistent weakness in consumer confidence could materially weigh on the recovery, 
underscoring the fragile nature of the current outlook.

1.2 
Some fiscal paths may raise debt sustainability concerns

International agreements on trade have reduced short-term uncertainty, but 
cyclical and structural fiscal challenges remain. International trade agreements, 
including the US-EU deal announced in August, have averted the worst-case scenario 
of a trade war involving widespread retaliation. While the euro area growth outlook 
remains weak overall, it now appears to be more resilient, as tail risks from trade 
shocks are less likely in the near term (see Section 1.1). However, the full economic 
and financial impact of past shocks – notably tariff measures and trade frictions – will 
unfold over time. In addition, governments face a long list of structural issues that need 
to be addressed and may require public resources. These include the green and 
digital transitions, ageing populations, low productivity and the need to upgrade 
infrastructure and expand defence capabilities.

Fiscal fundamentals are on greatly differing trajectories across countries and 
remain particularly weak in some. While many euro area countries have made 
substantial progress on fiscal consolidation since the pandemic, some have not 
materially reduced their debt levels from the pandemic-era peaks and are still running

5 ECB Consumer Expectations Survey findings suggest that announcements of increased defence 
spending are perceived as a burden on households’ financial situations (see the box entitled “Higher 
defence spending and its impact on household expectations”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB, 2025). 
This could be explained by Ricardian effects, which may restrain household consumption.

6 See the “Combined monetary policy decisions and statement”, ECB, 11 September 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

sizeable budget deficits (Chart 1.3, panel a). This is less of a problem for countries 
that still have low or medium-sized levels of debt. For more highly indebted euro area 
countries, however, such a trajectory for fiscal fundamentals could raise debt 
sustainability concerns among investors, especially where consolidation efforts are 
complicated by small or unstable parliamentary majorities. Furthermore, the Next 
Generation EU programme finishes at the end of 2026, and there is a risk that 
substantial amounts of available funds will not be disbursed to Member States in time.7 
If additional flexibility is applied to speed up disbursement, it will still be important to 
ensure that funded projects and structural reforms are of appropriate quality. Overall, 
euro area deficits are expected to increase in the coming years.8

Chart 1.3 
Euro area countries face divergent fiscal paths, with some struggling to reduce deficits 
and meet rising defence spending targets

a) Change in debt levels and budget balance 
b) Defence spending over time across euro 
area NATO members

(Q1 2019-Q2 2025; percentage points, percentages of GDP) 
(2014-25, percentages of GDP)

Sources: ECB and Eurostat (GFS), NATO and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the left graph shows percentage point changes in the debt-to-GDP ratio since Q1 2019. The horizontal red line in the right 
graph denotes the target for the budget balance under the Stability and Growth Pact. Panel b: data on defence spending come from 
NATO, with the figures for 2024 and 2025 being estimates. Data may differ from official euro area statistics because of differences in the 
way defence spending is classified.

Increasing geopolitical tensions and hybrid threats underscore the need to 
boost defence spending, which may prove difficult for some countries. In June 
2025 NATO allies agreed on a new defence spending target of 5% of GDP, to be 
reached by 2035. This new target comprises a minimum of 3.5% for core defence and 
up to 1.5% for broader security-related spending, including some expenditure on 
infrastructure.9 Despite the faster progress made after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 
2022, many euro area countries still fall substantially short of this new target

7 See “NextGenerationEU – The road to 2026”, European Commission, 4 June 2025.

8 See “ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, September 2025”, published on the ECB’s 
website on 11 September 2025, and “European Economic Forecast Autumn 2025”, Institutional Paper, 
No 327, European Commission, November 2025.

9 See “The Hague Summit Declaration”, press release, NATO, 25 June 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Macro-financial and credit environment

(Chart 1.3, panel b). Governments widely agree that defence capabilities need to be 
significantly enhanced, and economic analysis suggests that this could have a positive 
impact on growth.10 Given the fact that fiscal space is low, however, there have so far 
been few concrete pledges to greatly increase defence spending. Accordingly, 
initiatives to create fiscal space under the European Commission’s Readiness 2030 
plan are of particular importance. For instance, activating the Stability and Growth 
Pact’s national escape clause for several euro area countries would provide greater 
budgetary flexibility over the next four years.11 In addition, the full €150 billion 
envelope of the Security Action for Europe instrument has been tentatively allocated. 
Disbursements could start in early 2026.12

Market pricing reflects changes in investors’ risk perceptions towards 
individual euro area countries. The flight-to-safety dynamics seen in the aftermath 
of the April tariff turmoil have led to an overall decline in sovereign bond spreads 
across most euro area countries (Chart 1.4, panel a and Special Feature A). More

recently, investors’ perceptions of risk have focused on the deteriorating trajectory of 
fiscal fundamentals in France. As a result, French sovereign bond spreads have 
moved closer to those for Italian debt (see Chapter 2). That said, French sovereign 
bond spreads have remained within the same range since June 2024 and markets 
have stayed liquid.

Shifts in demand among institutional investors and a weak growth outlook will 
weigh on interest costs and debt levels. While ECB policy rate cuts have reduced 
the costs associated with short-term borrowing, longer-term rates have increased as 
the yield curve has steepened over the course of 2025 (Chart 1.4, panel b). As most 
sovereign debt is issued at longer maturities and debt that was issued at much lower 
rates needs to be rolled over, interest burdens are set to increase further and will 
weigh on budgets for years to come (Chart 1.4, panel c). At the same time, shifts in 
the investor base, notably in the context of Dutch pension fund reform, will likely lower 
demand from some euro area institutional investors for longer-dated debt (see 
Chapter 4). Investors might therefore only absorb additional bond issuance at higher 
yields or with shorter maturities, increasing interest rate and rollover risks for 
sovereigns. Higher interest rates, coupled with inflation stabilising around the ECB’s 
2% target and subdued real economic growth, imply that the favourable impact of the 
interest rate-growth differential on debt levels will fade.

A reassessment of sovereign risk could lead to stress in bond markets, 
underpinning the importance of ensuring debt sustainability. Creditors’ 
confidence might be tested if consolidation efforts and reforms are delayed. Triggers 
such as (unexpected) rating downgrades, weak demand in sovereign auctions or 
stress in global benchmark bond markets could lead to a repricing of euro area 
sovereign risk. In particular, foreign investors might be sensitive to such signals and 
could quickly reverse investment flows. The repricing of sovereign risk also carries the 
potential for spillovers to the funding costs of corporates and banks. However, such 
dynamics have not been seen recently. To retain investor confidence, governments 
should ensure that the public finances are sustainable and in line with the EU’s 
economic governance framework, while prioritising essential growth-enhancing 
structural reforms and strategic investment. At the euro area level, it will be necessary 
over the coming years to consolidate the public finances in a growth-friendly manner 
and manage medium-term fiscal challenges.

1.3 
Firms face a fragile recovery given external pressures and 
high debt service costs

financing costs and collateral requirements.13 Banks reported a small, unexpected net 
tightening of credit standards in the third quarter amid perceived risks related to the 
economic outlook, while the terms and conditions for new loans were broadly 
unchanged.14 The demand for loans increased slightly, albeit from levels that had 
remained weak, suggesting that firms remain cautious over taking on new debt amid 
elevated uncertainty (see Section 1.1). Against this backdrop, lending flows to 
non-financial corporations (NFCs) in the euro area were generally subdued in 2025 
(Chart 1.5 panel a).15 This suggests that while financing costs have become more 
favourable overall, firms remain reluctant to expand borrowing in the face of uncertain 
prospects for profitability and demand.16

Despite some relief from lower interest rates, euro area firms continue to face 
high debt service costs. While the recent cuts in interest rates have reduced costs 
for new corporate borrowing, the stock of outstanding debt is continuing to reprice at 
less favourable conditions, keeping debt service ratios elevated (Chart 1.5, panel b). 
Survey data show that most firms believe their financial positions are under strain from 
weaker external demand, which is squeezing their profitability. At the same time, 
bankruptcy has shown mixed trends (Chart 1.5, panel c). Aggregate corporate 
bankruptcies are increasing and are above pre-pandemic levels, but recent data point 
to declines in sectors such as information and communication and modest 
improvements in manufacturing. This coincides with a recovery in new passenger car 
and commercial vehicle registrations, which rose by 5.9% year on year in the third 
quarter of 2025, suggesting that demand for durable goods has stabilised to some 
extent. Taken together, these dynamics suggest that while there are some signs of an 
incipient recovery, overall corporate resilience remains fragile. Small firms and firms 
operating in export-dependent sectors are facing particular challenges.17

International trade dynamics remain a key source of pressure on the euro area 
corporate sector. The tariffs introduced by the United States in early 2025, capped at 
15% for most goods by the new US-EU trade agreement, are weighing most on 
manufacturing, which is one of the euro area’s most export-oriented sectors.18 The 
frontloading of shipments in the first quarter of 2025 was followed by weaker exports to 
the United States in the second quarter, underlining the drag from trade frictions. A 
much greater impact from trade tensions is reported by firms that export to the United 
States than by those that do not. Many are indicating that they need to redirect sales 
towards domestic and intra-EU markets and they also need to restructure their supply 
chains. The appreciation of the euro in recent months has compounded these 
pressures, eroding price competitiveness abroad at a time when Chinese firms, facing 
weak domestic demand, are increasing their exports to global markets. This is 
reflected in declining order book balances for industry in the euro area. These remain 
in negative territory despite some stabilisation at the margin (Chart 1.6, panel a), 
pointing to continued weakness in external demand.

The broader corporate vulnerability picture remains mixed. The composite 
vulnerability indicator has increased from previous quarters and suggests that overall 
risks related to debt servicing, profitability and especially activity remain above their 
historical average levels. However, projections point to a stabilisation over the forecast 
horizon (Chart 1.6, panel b). Altman Z-scores point to particular stress among 
manufacturing firms, which are generally continuing to show greater distress than 
other real-economy sector firms (Chart 1.6, panel c). Notably, recent dynamics 
diverge between the manufacturing and the non-manufacturing sectors across the 
distribution.19 These pressures underline the sectoral discrepancies in the corporate 
outlook. While services, construction and parts of the retail trade have shown relative 
resilience, manufacturing remains the most severely affected by tariffs, the

19 However, as there are fewer observations at the margin, results should be interpreted with caution, 
although they do provide information on emerging sectoral patterns.

appreciation of the euro and intensified import competition. These developments are 
consistent with the notion of rolling corporate recessions, where sector-specific 
downturns emerge sequentially and do not immediately translate into broader stress 
(see Box 1), although there could be greater correlation between sectoral 
vulnerabilities if shocks were to align.

Overall, the outlook for the euro area corporate sector remains fragile, amid 
easing domestic financing conditions but persistent external headwinds. While 
lower lending rates and some degree of stabilisation in bankruptcy trends are 
providing support, many firms are continuing to struggle with high debt service 
burdens and weak profitability. Adjusting to US tariffs, a stronger euro and increased 
competition from Chinese exporters are proving particularly challenging for 
manufacturing and other export-oriented sectors, whereas more domestically focused 
industries are showing greater resilience. On balance, the risks to the euro area NFC 
sector remain tilted to the downside, as any further intensification of trade frictions or 
renewed weakening of global demand could materially test corporate resilience.

Rolling corporate recessions mask underlying vulnerabilities and complicate risk analysis. 
Despite increased broader macroeconomic challenges and corporate vulnerabilities in the euro area 
in recent years, as indicated for instance by the marked rise in business bankruptcies, credit metrics 
such as the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio have remained surprisingly low (Chart A, panel a).20 
This disconnect between major macroeconomic shocks (e.g. the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
energy price shock after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine) and the absence of broad-based stress across 
corporate and bank balance sheets is often attributed to fiscal support cushioning the economy and 
inflation dynamics indirectly improving firms’ debt servicing capacity and profit margins.21,22 However, 
it may also reflect a structural shift in how downturns unfold. Unlike traditional recessions, which affect 
the economy uniformly, rolling recessions – defined as sectoral downturns that propagate 
sequentially – exacerbate weaknesses in specific sectors over time.23 This staggered pattern 
obscures the overall health of the economy, leading to heightened uncertainty. While structural shifts 
such as climate change and digitalisation pose medium to long-term sectoral risks, rolling recessions 
entail the short-term risk of non-linearity, potentially triggering an unexpected economy-wide 
downturn. This box explores how rolling recessions may create hidden vulnerabilities and complicate 
the assessment of macro-financial risks.

Rolling recessions are reinforced by firm-level frictions and the evolving nature of economic 
shocks. Firms adjust their capital stock and output only in response to sufficiently large deviations 
from optimal conditions, owing to fixed costs of change, irreversibility and uncertainty.24 This rigidity 
in their investment and pricing behaviour means they delay taking action until shocks are sufficiently 
substantial or persistent to justify the adjustment costs. These microeconomic frictions are amplified 
by the changing nature of economic shocks. Shocks such as climate change, technological advances 
and geopolitical disruptions, which are more sector-specific in terms of their impact, are becoming 
more prominent and persistent, and are increasingly shaping macroeconomic volatility and inflation 
dynamics.25 At the same time, traditional shocks, such as oil price and monetary policy shocks –

20 As insolvency regimes differ across countries, the lead-lag relationship between bankruptcies and NPLs 
can reverse (i.e. NPLs may precede bankruptcies). Moreover, while rising bankruptcies may signal 
stress, they can also boost medium to long-term productivity by reallocating resources to more efficient 
firms. Nonetheless, bankruptcies serve as a proxy for the state of the economy and should ultimately be 
reflected in bank balance sheets.

which tend to be more broad-based – are having less of an impact or are propagating differently as a 
result of shifts in energy use, globalisation and institutional policy frameworks.26

Rolling recessions may lead to a build-up of risks in individual sectors, creating pockets of 
vulnerability. Evidence from recent macro-financial shocks suggests that sectoral vulnerabilities can 
materialise in a staggered manner without spilling over to the broader economy until they reach 
critical mass or become synchronised (Chart A, panel b). While aggregate GDP and employment 
data may appear stable, firms in sectors like agriculture, construction or energy and interest 
rate-sensitive industries can face margin pressures, cost shocks and financing constraints owing to 
external factors such as commodity price changes, supply chain disruptions and monetary policy 
tightening. Some sectors are structurally more vulnerable, with high levels of volatility and more 
frequent downturns indicating greater sensitivity to shocks and lower adaptability (Chart A, panel c). 
For example, construction and agriculture are generally more sensitive to weather conditions and 
climate change, while sectors such as industry tend to be more affected by financing conditions, 
energy prices and trade dynamics.

When vulnerability waves align, rolling recessions can become systemic. Although typically 
asynchronous, rolling sectoral downturns may converge to anywhere on the scale from no 
synchronisation to full alignment. Evidence from the euro area shows a spike in sectoral growth 
correlations during major crisis periods (Chart B, panel a). Synchronisation can be triggered by 
common shocks, such as rapid monetary policy tightening or surging energy prices, and reinforced by 
feedback loops due to credit market developments, trade links or investor sentiment, leading to 
contagion across otherwise weakly connected sectors. As soon as sectoral downturns align, banks 
may face deteriorating asset quality and rising capital needs.27 These risks are heightened if banks’ 
exposures are concentrated in specific sectors, which yields efficiency gains in normal times but 
amplifies losses during synchronised shocks.28 Historical evidence supports this notion: during the 
global financial crisis and the euro area sovereign debt crisis, for example, the share of sectors with 
negative growth in gross value added and lending surged to multi-year highs (Chart B, panel b).

Increasingly aligned sector-specific downturns could give rise to correlated credit losses 
across the banking sector. Banks may see a deterioration in asset quality as sectoral shocks 
interact, with high NPL correlations across key sectors, notably industry, real estate, trade and 
manufacturing, pointing to potential spillover risks (Chart C, panel a). Despite the current disconnect 
between heightened macro-financial uncertainty and subdued credit risk metrics, the number of 
sectors facing rising NPL ratios has increased since 2022, albeit unevenly across sectors (Chart C, 
panel b). This could raise the possibility of simultaneous losses across banks’ loan portfolios. Left

27 At this preliminary stage, a major recession could be triggered either by the alignment of sector-specific 
risks or by an aggregate shock causing such an alignment. Non-linear dynamics mean that even minor 
changes can have sizeable ripple effects.

unmitigated, localised sectoral downturns could turn into systemic credit events, weakening balance 
sheets, constraining new lending and further amplifying any downturn.

Risk surveillance frameworks and policy tools need to adequately capture sectoral patterns 
of vulnerability to address risks stemming from rolling recessions. Such sectoral downturns 
can create pockets of sectoral fragility, which may synchronise and turn into broad-based downturns 
with highly correlated credit losses across sectors. Mitigating these risks means refining risk 
surveillance practices and policy tools. This includes moving beyond tracking aggregate indicators to 
analysing data by sector, region and borrower type, while enhancing the availability and quality of 
granular data.

Household vulnerabilities are still low by historical standards. The ECB’s 
composite indicator of household vulnerabilities points towards high household 
resilience, underpinned by lower debt levels, a strong labour market and easier 
financing conditions. More recently, households’ debt servicing capacity has improved 
at the margin as interest rates have declined since inflation peaked. Meanwhile, lower 
income growth has tended to cause a marginal rise in the composite vulnerability 
indicator (Chart 1.7, panel a). Households’ improved debt servicing capacity is also 
evidenced by the continued, albeit slower, decline in the ratio of debt to gross

disposable income. Falling interest rates are gradually allowing the debt 
service/income ratio to stabilise at modest levels, albeit with some delay (Chart 1.7, 
panel b).

Nominal disposable income growth has normalised recently while the saving 
ratio has remained elevated by historical standards. After the strong catch-up 
dynamics seen following the period of higher inflation, nominal disposable income 
growth returned to pre-pandemic levels in the first quarter of 2025. At the same time, 
households’ saving ratios stabilised at a high level (Chart 1.8, panel a), despite the 
lower rates of return offered by typical retail saving instruments such as time deposits. 
This likely reflects precautionary behaviour in response to elevated global uncertainty 
and anticipation of possible future higher taxes and worsening financial situation. 
Looking forward, growth in household consumption is expected to pick up and saving 
ratios to move closer to historical averages. That said, domestic or foreign shocks – 
such as a further escalation of trade tensions or stronger appreciation of the euro – 
could dampen consumer confidence, which is already below historical averages.

The labour market remains strong despite subtle signs of potential weakening. 
The aggregate unemployment rate in the euro area remains close to record lows, with 
noticeable convergence among countries (Chart 1.8, panel b). Unemployment rates 
have declined particularly sharply in those countries that suffered from pronounced 
weakness in their labour markets a decade ago. By contrast, unemployment rates in 
some countries with greater exposure to global trade are beginning to exhibit a modest 
trend upwards, albeit from a low starting point. Other labour market indicators, such as 
vacancy rates and hours worked, also point to a modest slowdown, particularly in 
specific sectors like manufacturing. However, it remains uncertain whether these 
dynamics are significant enough to trigger a broader economic downturn or whether 
they merely indicate a reallocation of activity between sectors. A broader economic 
downturn, if accompanied by a notable increase in unemployment, would materially 
worsen households’ financial situations. This would have a disproportionate impact on 
less wealthy individuals, who rely almost exclusively on wage income. In such a 
scenario, downward pressure on residential real estate prices would most likely 
emerge, and banks’ credit risk would rise beyond its current levels.

1.5 
As a recovery in real estate markets gains traction, tail 
risks remain elevated in some countries and segments

Demand for residential real estate (RRE) remained robust in the third quarter of 
2025, while construction activity continued to be subdued. The sustained 
demand seen for mortgages was driven largely by the prevailing levels of interest

rates and improved market prospects for the housing sector. This occurred as credit 
standards remained largely unchanged during the period, following on from a slight 
tightening in the previous quarter. Banks anticipate that these dynamics will persist, 
with mortgage demand projected to rise further in the fourth quarter of 2025, albeit at a 
more moderate pace, and credit standards expected to tighten only modestly, 
supporting this trend (Chart 1.9, panel a). However, improved financial conditions 
have not yet translated into a meaningful recovery in housing supply. The Purchasing 
Managers’ Index for residential construction in the euro area remains in contractionary 
territory, despite some recent improvements. In addition, the issuance of building 
permits for residential construction – a forward-looking indicator of supply – remains 
close to historical lows (Chart 1.9, panel b). The imbalance between strong demand 
and constrained supply is likely to exert upward pressure on RRE prices in the short 
term.

Growth in RRE prices has continued to vary across euro area countries, with 
tail risks remaining elevated in some jurisdictions. While RRE prices rose on 
aggregate across the euro area in the second quarter of 2025, there was significant 
cross-country variation. Several euro area economies experienced robust growth in 
RRE prices, while more moderate levels were observed in others. The significant 
household deleveraging seen in a number of countries in recent years may be 
contributing to the present market upswing in some cases (Chart 1.10, panel a). 
Moreover, current price dynamics often correlate with credit growth, which has 
accelerated markedly in more buoyant markets. Aggregate tail risks to housing prices 
declined slightly in the third quarter of 2025, largely reflecting improved financial

conditions (Chart 1.10, panel b). Nonetheless, these risks remain elevated in some 
countries and could increase in markets in which declining affordability could 
exacerbate vulnerabilities over the medium term.

Investor sentiment on commercial real estate (CRE) has improved, indicating a 
stabilisation in the market, although risks remain. Investor sentiment data 
continue to show a sharp decline in the share of investors who believe the market is in 
a downturn compared with the period of monetary tightening (Chart 1.11, panel a). As 
is the case for residential markets, investors’ views on the current stage of the cycle 
vary on clear geographical lines. For those countries most affected by the recent 
downturn (Germany and Austria), investors see the market as having reached its 
trough. For those countries less affected (Greece, Spain and Italy), investors typically 
see the market as being in an upswing. Despite the stabilisation, activity remains 
subdued, and the number of transactions conducted in euro area markets is still about 
30% below its 2019 peak (Chart 1.11, panel b). Market intelligence indicates that this 
may be down to ongoing investor uncertainty. As CRE markets are exposed to both 
international capital flows and local economic conditions, they are highly vulnerable to 
the ongoing macroeconomic and geopolitical uncertainty. Activity is particularly 
subdued in office markets, where the shift towards hybrid working practices continues 
to pose a challenge. As previous editions of the Financial Stability Review have noted, 
the outlook for the lower-quality end of the market is particularly poor.

A recovery in real estate markets is under way, but risks to financial stability 
could still materialise and should be monitored closely. Real estate markets are 
highly sensitive to developments in the broader real economy and to changes in 
medium to long-term interest rates. Accordingly, a sharp deterioration in the economic 
outlook or an unexpected rise in interest rates could cause prices to start falling again. 
This is particularly the case in countries where housing affordability is low or declining 
and countries that have a large commercial office segment coupled with still-high 
vacancy rates. This makes it important to continue closely monitoring the associated 
risks, taking current economic policy uncertainty and geopolitical risks into 
consideration. Against this background, maintaining resilience in the banking sector is 
key to limiting financial stability risks stemming from property markets. This is being 
achieved by applying adequate releasable buffers and appropriately calibrated 
borrower-based measures to preserve sound lending standards (see Section 3.5).

2.1 
Steepening yield curves signal growing unease over 
sovereign debt trajectories

After April’s tariff turmoil, sovereign bond markets were dominated by worries 
over fiscal debt and tail risks, while risk assets mostly stayed calm. Yields on 
ultra-long sovereign bonds have continued to rise globally amid unease over fiscal 
sustainability and changes in supply-demand dynamics in sovereign bond markets.29

Despite some volatility, the price of gold has risen significantly, which is consistent 
with increased demand for tail risk hedging, among other factors. At the same time, 
valuations in most risky asset markets are still high. This could be an indicator of 
strong optimism, but it could also reflect the fear of missing out on a rally and the 
difficulties associated with pricing financial assets in an environment characterised by 
elevated uncertainty and several concurrent structural shifts (see Section 2.2). One 
such shift under way is being caused by AI, with its promise to boost productivity. 
While there is considerable potential for upside and the high valuations of AI-related 
firms are underpinned by exceptionally strong earnings, any setbacks in AI advances 
could lead to sharp asset price adjustments, including in the opaque private markets 
(see Section 2.3).

Yields on ultra-long sovereign bonds have risen sharply across the globe, 
reflecting growing concerns over fiscal and debt sustainability. Since the 
beginning of the year, euro area GDP-weighted 30-year yields have risen by roughly 
50 basis points, whereas two-year yields have declined by around 10 basis points.30 
While at first the steepening of the yield curve was broad based across maturities, the 
most recent move has been concentrated at the ultra-long end. Steepening yield 
curves are a global phenomenon, with 30-year yields reaching multi-year highs across 
major advanced economies including the United States, the United Kingdom and 
Japan (Chart 2.1, panel a). Investors are demanding higher term premia to 
compensate for fiscal and debt sustainability concerns, according to market contacts. 
The outsized rise in 30-year yields suggests that one-off factors, such as the Dutch 
pension fund reform and regulatory changes in Japan, which disproportionately affect 
ultra-long maturities, could have played a role as well. The latter is, however, likely to 
be less significant, given the strong global factor underlying the rise in 30-year yields in 
the euro area and the high correlation of the change in 30-year yields with changes in 
the debt outlook.

Changes in supply-demand dynamics have also contributed to the rise in 
yields. On the supply side, euro area governments face elevated financing needs 
(Chart 2.1, panel b). These are being driven by expectations of rising defence 
spending amid geopolitical tensions, the structural requirements of the green and 
digital transitions and infrastructure investment. At the same time, demand patterns 
are changing because of shifts in the investor base. While quantitative tightening has 
already removed the largest price-insensitive buyer from sovereign bond markets, 
foreign investors and other price-sensitive investors have become more prominent, 
especially since 2022. Going forward, the reform of the Dutch pension system may 
also affect demand dynamics. Dutch pension funds, which account for around 65% of 
euro area pension funds’ sovereign bond holdings, are expected to reduce their 
long-term euro area sovereign bond positions in the coming years, following the 
reform (see Chapter 4). This combination of fundamental concerns over sovereign 
risks and the growing funding needs of governments leaves sovereign bond markets 
vulnerable to further repricing. The presence of hedge funds in sovereign bond 
markets can significantly amplify financial shocks when leveraged positions need to 
be unwound. 31 These positions are particularly exposed to deteriorating funding 
conditions in the repo market and heightened volatility in bond markets (see 
Section 4.2).

Debt sustainability concerns have resurfaced in some countries amid political 
uncertainty, but the broader convergence of bond spreads is a positive signal. 
Following the collapse of the French government in September, the spread between 
French and German sovereign bonds widened, but has remained within the range 
seen over the last year, and markets have remained functional and liquid. By contrast, 
yields on Italian sovereign bonds have declined in relative terms to the extent that 
Italian yields fell below French yields for the first time since 2003 (Chart 2.2, panel a). 
This may be part of a broader convergence between previously higher-rated and 
lower-rated sovereigns in the euro area, with average euro area sovereign bond 
spreads (excluding France) on a downward trend (Chart 2.2, panel b). This 
compression of spreads has recently been driven less by changes in German yields 
and more by declining yields in other countries. This suggests that there is no 
contagion at this stage from developments in France to other euro area sovereign 
bonds. However, disappointments over fiscal consolidation efforts, weak demand at 
auctions or further political instability could trigger a broader repricing of sovereign risk 
in the euro area, especially given the currently tight levels of spreads.

Sovereign risk pricing appears to be broadly aligned with fiscal fundamentals. 
Expected trajectories for debt-to-GDP ratios correlate strongly with the current 
sovereign bond spread levels seen across the euro area (Chart 2.3, panel a). 
Moreover, for many countries the compression of sovereign bond spreads is on the 
back of improvements expected in budget balances over the next few years. This 
suggests that bond investors are paying close attention to the fiscal outlook. Current 
pricing may, however, provide limited compensation for adverse scenarios. At the 
same time, the yields of selected high-grade French corporates have recently traded 
below those for French sovereign bonds (Chart 2.3, panel b). While this partly reflects 
a robust credit market, the pattern is also consistent with international investors 
seeking euro-wide exposure via large, diversified corporates as opposed to 
single-country exposures via sovereign holdings.

(years, percentages) 
(3 Jan. 2022-18 Nov. 2025; US dollars per ounce, USD billions)

Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P. 
Notes: Panel a: x-axis is tenor of inflation swaps in years from the selected date point. The latest observation is for 18 November 2025. 
Panel b: for gold ETF flows, the largest gold ETF was used (Bloomberg ticker: GLD US Equity). ETF stands for exchange-traded funds.

The risks of spillovers from US Treasury markets to euro area sovereign bond 
markets are high, amid growing concerns over US fiscal sustainability and the 
changing role of the US dollar in global financial markets. Expectations that large 
US budget deficits will persist have intensified worries about long-term US fiscal 
sustainability. Surveys of market participants have also revealed increasing concerns 
over tail risks. The most frequently cited risks to financial stability include the 
possibility that the Federal Reserve System’s independence could be reduced and the 
diminishing safe-haven status of the dollar. Since the tariff announcements in April, 
market dynamics have been suggesting a potential shift in the US dollar’s role in 
global financial markets (see Special Feature A). Despite the rally in US equity 
markets, the US dollar has depreciated by around 10% against the euro so far this 
year. Increased foreign exchange hedging activity indicates that international 
investors are losing their appetite for unhedged exposure to US dollar-denominated 
assets (see Chapter 4, Chart 4.3, panel b). The slight rise in longer-term inflation 
swap rates is signalling that markets may show little concern about upside inflation 
risks (Chart 2.4, panel a). At the same time, despite the slight adjustment seen 
recently, the price of gold remains historically high, which is consistent with tail risk 
hedging. Furthermore, market contacts also attribute the rise in the gold price to 
elevated geopolitical risk, persistent policy uncertainty, central bank purchases and 
rising demand from retail investors. The latter is reflected by rising inflows into 
exchange-traded funds that invest in gold and may signal increasingly speculative 
behaviour (Chart 2.4, panel b).

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

2.2 
Compressed risk pricing in equity and corporate bond 
markets

Valuations in risky assets remain stretched, which leaves room for sudden 
adjustments. Having recovered strongly from their lows in early April, euro area 
equity and corporate bond markets have seen further gains. The strong overall 
performance of risky assets was driven by de-escalating trade tensions, solid 
corporate earnings and expectations of (further) monetary policy easing across major 
developed markets. In the United States, policy rates are expected to fall sharply and 
the end of quantitative tightening has been announced, while the probability of 
recession has recently declined.32 This may provide substantial support to valuations 
of risky assets, as the positive effect on valuations from lower discount rates is not 
expected to be offset by significantly lower growth. These developments have led to 
equity risk premia, credit spreads and implied volatility in risky asset classes and oil 
prices staying mostly at or below long-term averages since the May 2025 edition of the 
Financial Stability Review was published. Equity market volatility has seen several 
short-lived spikes and stood at levels above the long-term average at the cut-off date, 
but equity risk premia and corporate bond spreads remain well below their long-term 
averages (Chart 2.5). While geopolitical risk and trade policy uncertainty declined, 
they could quickly re-emerge and much of the impact of tariffs may still be ahead, 
which could challenge elevated valuations. Compressed spreads in euro area 
high-yield bonds also stand in contrast to a significant level of issuance this year and 
the uptick in default rates seen since April (see Overview).

32 According to Bloomberg, based on the median forecast from regular bank surveys, the probability of 
recession in the United States had fallen to 30% by November, back to the levels prevailing during the 
tariff-related market turmoil in April. This is down from the 40% seen when the May 2025 edition of the 
Financial Stability Review was published.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.5 
Equity risk premia and credit spreads remain well below their long-term averages, 
while implied equity market volatility has recently increased

Distribution of the deviation from ten-year average for risk, financial assets valuation and 
volatility indicators since the May 2025 edition of the Financial Stability Review was published

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: While z-scores are computed over a ten-year period (June 2016 to 18 November 2025), the depicted boxplots show z-score 
values only for the period since the May 2025 edition of the Financial Stability Review was published. X denotes average values; - 
denotes median values; blue dots denote the latest values. EA stands for euro area; IG stands for investment grade; HY stands for high 
yield; FX stands for foreign exchange; EM stands for emerging markets. Equity risk premia are calculated as earnings yield minus 
ten-year sovereign bond yields.

Along with high levels of optimism, valuations in markets might also reflect the 
fear of missing out on gains from a rally in risky assets and difficulties in 
pricing complex risks. Equity markets have shown remarkable resilience to shocks 
in recent years, as evidenced by faster recoveries and smaller drawdowns in the euro 
area (Chart 2.6, panel a), with similar findings for the United States. This might have 
increased the fear of missing out on quick recoveries after a shock or on a continued 
rally. Moreover, markets appear to have become less sensitive to tariff-related news, 
as illustrated by the reaction of the broad euro area equity index to recent tariff 
announcements (Chart 2.6, panel b). By contrast, assets directly affected by 
individual tariff announcements have continued to react, as evidenced by the sharp 
movements in copper prices seen in July. Another factor explaining the calmness in 
markets is that at this time, it is particularly difficult to assess the likelihood of risks 
materialising and their related impact. Uncertainties surrounding several concurrent 
structural shifts in geopolitics, artificial intelligence, energy and defence, for example, 
remain elevated and might not be reflected in prevailing market pricing. Additionally, 
higher tariffs have not so far had any strong adverse impact on global growth or 
inflation, although these effects could materialise at a later stage.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.6 
Recent equity market downturns have been short-lived, which might have increased 
the fear of missing out on a rally and reduced markets’ sensitivity to adverse news

a) Drawdown in EURO STOXX 
b) Reaction of EURO STOXX to various tariff 
announcements

(1 Jan. 2000-18 Nov. 2025, percentages) 
(index = 100 on event day, days from tariff news event)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., LSEG and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: drawdown is defined as the cumulative loss since the last peak. Panel b: the chart shows the cumulative equity market 
reaction to major tariff-related news events until 18 November 2025. Indices are normalised to 100 at the day of the announcement (T), 
with subsequent days (T+1, T+2, T+3) rescaled relative to that baseline. Besides the tariff announcements shown for the selected week 
in April 2025, other recent tariff announcements, shown in grey, include the tariffs announced on Canada and Mexico, those tariffs taking 
effect, the global implementation of steel and aluminium tariffs, subsequent increases in steel and aluminium duties, various tariff 
deadlines, extensions and trade deals, the announcement of 30% tariffs on imports from the EU, effective on 18 August 2025, the US-EU 
trade agreement and the revision of reciprocal tariff rates, including higher tariffs on India and the announcement of 130% tariffs on 
China.

Crypto-asset valuations have profited from broadening investor interest, 
including from traditional finance, but remain highly volatile. Crypto market 
capitalisation breached the USD 4 trillion mark for the first time in July (Chart 2.7, 
panel a). This was driven by a more favourable regulatory climate and growing interest 
from both retail and institutional investors.33 In addition, there is evidence for rising 
speculative leverage, which might have contributed to a sharp adjustment precipitated 
by escalating trade tensions between the United States and China in October of this 
year. Since then, market capitalisation has declined to USD 3.3 trillion, roughly the 
same level that prevailed when the May 2025 edition of the Financial Stability Review 
was published. Stablecoins, a sub-segment of the crypto universe, have received 
significant attention in recent months on the back of global regulatory developments. 
Although comparatively small in amount (USD 290 billion), stablecoins fulfil a central 
role in the crypto universe, and their strong interconnectedness with the traditional 
financial system stands out (see Box 5). Financial stability risks from this market 
segment seem to be limited in the euro area, but further monitoring is still warranted.

33 The growing interconnectedness between the crypto-asset ecosystem and traditional finance is opening 
up new channels of potential contagion, which will require close monitoring. However, the financial 
stability risks to the euro area currently appear to be limited. See the special feature entitled “Just another 
crypto boom? Mind the blind spots”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2025.

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.7 
Crypto markets reach short-lived new highs, driven by institutional and retail investors, 
the latter also increasing their share in US equity turnover

a) Total crypto market capitalisation 
b) Share of retail investors in US equity 
trading volume and S&P 500

(5 Jan. 2020-18 Nov. 2025, USD trillions) 
(1 Jan. 2018-18 Nov. 2025; percentages, index level)

Sources: CoinDesk Data, IntoTheBlock, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Note: Panel a: data are shown at weekly frequency. The latest observations are for 18 November 2025. Panel b: shows the share of retail 
investors in US equity trading volumes as quarterly data forward-filled to daily frequency.

Retail investors can help stabilise the markets, but some retail segments in the 
United States are showing signs of exuberance, with potential spillovers to the 
euro area. Evidence from the euro area and the United States suggests that demand 
from retail investors has remained steady, even during market sell-offs. In the United 
States, retail investor participation in equity markets has shown a sustained increase 
since the COVID-19 pandemic. Retail investors accounted for an average of 14% in 
total equity trading volume between 2010 and 2019, which increased to an average of 
19% since 2020.34 The share increased – or at least remained stable – when equity 
prices fell (Chart 2.7, panel b), which might indicate that retail investors have been 
aiming to benefit from low prices (a “buy-the-dip” strategy). While similar data for the 
euro area are not readily available, flows into euro area-domiciled funds during the 
market sell-off in April 2025 point to similar dynamics, which might point towards a 
stabilising role played by retail investors in financial markets (see Box 2). But there 
are also signs of exuberance in some retail investor segments, including US retail

34 According to data from Bloomberg. Data for the euro area equity market are not available, but ECB 
statistics show that around 8.7% of euro area equity is held by the euro area household sector. Mobilising 
retail savings more effectively would help to advance the savings and investments union (see 
Section 4.4).

Financial Stability Review, November 2025 – Financial markets

stocks and 0DTE contracts.35 While quite specific to the United States, these 
developments are relevant for the euro area, as overheating or sudden adjustments in 
US markets can spill over to euro area markets.

High valuations set the stage for sharp and sudden moves, should risks 
materialise. Seemingly calm markets might not adjust gradually to shifting 
probabilities of risk scenarios, but could instead react non-linearly, with sharp price 
declines when risks materialise. Currently, high valuations leave more room for 
negative surprises to have larger effects on financial markets than for positive 
surprises to do so, as there are several sources of risk. Despite declining risk indices, 
the probability of negative macro-financial shocks remains elevated and the impact of 
higher tariffs on inflation and growth is yet to show. Geopolitical tensions could 
escalate further, and policy uncertainty could re-emerge suddenly. Corporate bond 
markets are vulnerable to shifts in risk sentiment, as they show tight risk premia 
despite deteriorating credit risk. In addition, high valuations are partly driven by strong 
expectations in relation to AI-boosted economic growth and related financing flows. 
These investments might turn out to be less profitable than expected. The recent pick 
up in equity market volatility could be a first sign of a turn in risk sentiment.

Box 2 
 
The role of household investors in market downturns

Episodes of high volatility in financial markets have raised concerns about the resilience of 
investment funds to liquidity shocks. Investment funds running a strategy focused on risky assets 
such as equities and high-yield bonds may suffer from large investor outflows during episodes of high 
volatility and declining market prices. Funds that operate with significant liquidity mismatches may 
thus be forced to sell less-liquid assets at unfavourable conditions.36 The structure of the investor 
base can play a significant role in fund fragility during such stress episodes.37 This box zooms in on 
the importance of household investors as a stabilising factor for investment fund liquidity during 
market downturns, with a focus on the April 2025 market turmoil.

Over the last decade, household investors have become the largest domestic investor group 
in euro area equity and high-yield bond funds, which means that they may increasingly be 
driving fund flow dynamics. The share of households holding euro area-domiciled equity and 
high-yield bond funds has increased by approximately 25% since 2017 (Chart A, panel a). Today, 
households’ holdings match those of the major domestic institutional investors combined, making

35 US retail stocks (proxied by the Goldman Sachs Retail Favorites Index) and so-called meme stocks 
(proxied by the UBS Meme Stock Index) have outperformed the broad market since the start of the year 
by 28% and 24% respectively. Also, the share of zero days to expiration (0DTE) contracts in total S&P 
500 option volumes has increased markedly, rising from 15% in January 2019 to reach 61% in October 
2025. Retail investors significantly increased their share in these very short-dated contracts, possibly 
engaging in speculative trading strategies. Cboe estimates that retail investors account for 50-60% of 
SPX 0DTE trading; see “0DTEs Decoded: Positioning, Trends, and Market Impact”, Cboe, 2 May 2025. 
In a similar vein, payment for order flow, indicating remuneration for neo-brokers predominantly serving 
retail clients, has increased in recent years. This further underscores the increasing role of retail activity 
in market dynamics.

them the largest type of domestic investor. Investor groups differ in their investment preferences and 
constraints, which has an impact on fund flow dynamics. Households typically pursue very long-term 
investment gains, so their investment behaviour is less responsive to temporary market shifts.38 
Moreover, the absence of leverage makes households’ portfolios less prone to liquidity shocks, while 
institutional investors may have to liquidate positions in times of sudden market downturns to service 
margin calls or reduce leverage.

Differences in investment behaviour across investor groups may be particularly pronounced 
in times of market downturns that trigger equity and bond sell-offs. After the global tariff 
announcement by the US Administration in April this year, redemptions of fund shares by institutional 
and foreign investors were more pronounced than those by households. Households also showed a 
stronger tendency to re-invest once it was announced that tariffs would not be implemented 
immediately (Chart A, panel b).

During recent episodes of market stress, households have sold lower volumes of equity and 
high-yield corporate bond fund shares than foreign and institutional investors. Regression 
analysis at the individual fund level suggests that outflows were significantly larger for funds primarily 
held by foreign or institutional investors than for funds primarily held by households. This holds true

A larger household investor base provided significantly better funding stability for euro area 
investment funds than other investor groups during the tariff turmoil seen in spring 2025. The 
differential impact of a prevailing household investor base proved to be positive for investment fund 
flows during the recent market turmoil. Household flows into investment funds holding global equities 
were significantly more positive than those of other investors both before and after the tariff 
announcement (Chart B, panel b). The household sector also provided more resilience to the funding 
stability of high-yield corporate bond funds during the April 2025 market stress (Chart B, panel c).

The stability benefit of a household investor base is not observed for households investing 
through more complex fund of funds structures. During the April tariff turmoil, euro 
area-domiciled investment funds held by funds of funds faced similar flow dynamics, irrespective of

the ultimate investor base (Chart C, panel a). Such funds of funds may make more frequent use of 
active fund management tools and leverage, increasing their procyclicality.

Speculative retail activity may contribute to pockets of procyclicality within household 
investment patterns during periods of increased market volatility. While many households 
invest their savings regularly in equity and bond funds independently of market developments, some 
pursue more speculative strategies that are more sensitive to short-term market swings. A novel 
sentiment indicator derived from Reddit discussions on financial assets shows that retail investor 
sentiment tends to move in line with global equity prices. This correlation strengthens during episodes 
of market stress, suggesting that retail speculators may display procyclical dynamics and reflect 
aspects of herding behaviour, whereas the link is weaker in more tranquil periods (Chart C, panel b). 
This highlights the potential for speculative retail activity to reinforce market dynamics. However, the 
footprint of retail speculators in euro area markets remains limited at present.

Greater household participation in euro area financial markets, including in the context of 
advancing the savings and investments union, can be beneficial for financial stability. 
Prudential policy arrangements to limit vulnerabilities from liquidity mismatch should take the role of 
investor behaviour into account. Recent market stress episodes have shown the positive impact a

broad household investor base can have on fund resilience, while risks from speculative retail traders 
remain limited. Accordingly, swift progress on the savings and investments union could strengthen 
investment funds’ funding stability in periods of stress by broadening households’ access to euro area 
markets.

The recovery seen in US equity markets since their lows in April has been 
primarily driven by technology and other AI-related firms, leading to new highs 
in market concentration. The stock prices of the seven dominant US technology 
companies, known collectively as the “Magnificent 7”, have increased by 58% since 8 
April. By contrast, the rest of the S&P 500 (i.e. excluding the “Magnificent 7”) has 
gained only 24%. This has led to a further increase in US equity market concentration, 
with the top 1% companies of the S&P 500 now accounting for around 30% of market 
capitalisation (Chart 2.8, panel a). A further breakdown by sector of the largest 
companies reveals that sectoral diversification has decreased over the last decade 
while the IT sector has significantly gained in prominence. Whereas concentration in 
the EURO STOXX remains around 10% for the top 1%, the IT sector has also gained 
a higher share in this index.

Parallels with the early 2000s are fuelling concerns that an asset price bubble 
may be building, but the current high valuations appear to be underpinned by 
exceptionally robust earnings performance. Survey results show that market 
participants are split as to whether AI stocks are in a bubble, but they see this as the 
most prominent tail risk.39 While some metrics suggest that valuations are similarly 
elevated, today’s largest companies have more diversified business models than 
those of the early 2000s. High valuations and the resulting equity market 
concentration appear to be underpinned by exceptional earnings growth (Chart 2.8, 
panel b). In turn, earnings are predicated on expectations that AI advancements will 
boost economic growth. In addition to high market concentration, the interconnection 
between AI-related firms has also reportedly increased. The currently high earnings 
growth of the largest companies may therefore also be supported by their interrelated 
business activities, which could amplify spillover effects if risks were to materialise.

Disappointing news relating to AI progress might lead to direct and indirect 
spillovers to the euro area financial system. The non-bank financial intermediation 
sector in the euro area remains highly exposed to US securities and would therefore 
suffer directly from valuation losses (see Overview). Irrespective of whether the “AI 
rally” has created an asset price bubble, idiosyncratic events in related stocks could

weigh on global risk sentiment, given their high market capitalisation. This might lead 
to an overall increase in global risk aversion with spillovers to euro area equity 
markets, even though they are less focused on the technology sector. At the same 
time, euro area equity markets might also profit from investment flows being redirected 
to markets that are less focused on technology.

While a large part of the current AI-induced capital spending boom is funded 
from profits, private markets and bond markets have started to play a growing 
role in financing AI-related companies and infrastructure. While private markets 
would appear to be particularly suitable for financing AI developments owing to their 
capacity to undertake riskier and long-term investments, current and future financing 
flows from private markets and bond markets add to the financial system’s overall 
exposure to any disappointments relating to AI.40 While AI-related investments in 
private markets are expected to accelerate further, the share of the IT sector in global 
private equity, private debt and venture capital transactions has already significantly 
increased since 2010 (Chart 2.9). In addition, the IT share in private debt transactions 
is much higher than the IT share in public bond markets.41 Moreover, there is

evidence that issuance of bonds by AI-related firms in the United States has picked up 
significantly. Overall, this signals a growing role of debt in the financing of AI-related 
capital spending. The strong acceleration of growth in the IT share in venture capital 
transactions in recent years is also indicative of an AI-related focus.

While concerns around risks in private markets are growing, the likelihood of 
further contagion across the wider financial system from stress in private 
markets remains difficult to assess. Private markets are characterised by 
significant cross-border flows and a high level of opaqueness. This was highlighted by 
the default of the US private credit borrower First Brands in September, which caused 
significant losses for several financial entities in the United States and Switzerland. In 
addition, the difficulties private equity funds face in exiting their investments may 
reflect a disconnect between the currently unrealised, and possibly inflated, valuations 
of private equity-backed companies and the prices that can actually be achieved when 
they are sold. This can lead to unforeseen losses for private equity investors. The 
opaqueness in private markets hinders a fully-fledged risk assessment and should be 
addressed from a policy perspective (see Section 4.4).42 Recent trends, such as the 
potential opening up of US pension funds to investments in private markets and retail 
investors gaining access to private markets (e.g. via neo-broker platforms), allow for 
more varied sources of funding on the positive side. An increase in retail investment 
flows does, however, raise concerns about increasing liquidity mismatches.

3.1 
An improving near-term outlook for banking sector 
profitability, although some downside risks remain

The profitability of euro area banks remained broadly stable in the first two 
quarters of 2025, although cross-country disparities persist. The trailing return 
on equity (ROE) of significant institutions rose slightly to 9.8% in the second quarter of 
2025 from 9.6% in the fourth quarter of 2024 (Chart 3.1, panel a). However, revenue 
growth in recent quarters has mainly been driven by non-core revenues such as 
trading and investment income. Core revenues were flat in the second quarter of

2025, as a moderate decline in net interest income was offset by continued growth in 
net fee and commission income. The dispersion of profitability across countries 
remains significant. Banks in countries which have enjoyed larger profitability gains 
since late 2021 have mainly benefited from a greater capacity to generate net interest 
income than their peers in countries with relatively smaller profitability improvements 
(Chart 3.1, panel b). In addition, a decline in loan loss provisions, partly driven by 
disposals of non-performing loans, has made a significant positive contribution to 
profitability for banks in the first group of countries. This contrasts with rising 
provisions having a moderate negative impact in the underperforming country group. 
This group mainly consists of countries that have seen non-performing loans increase 
since 2021, albeit from low starting levels. Furthermore, banks here have been less 
effective in cost control.

Net interest income growth has dipped into negative territory. The contraction of 
net interest income has been driven by a further compression in net interest margins 
(Chart 3.2, panel a), although net interest margin developments at bank level have 
continued to vary, depending on rate-fixation practices. In particular, margins declined 
less for banks with a higher share of fixed-rate loans, although the level remains 
higher for banks relying more on floating-rate loans (Chart 3.2, panel b). While

continued lending growth had a positive effect on net interest income, in the second 
quarter of 2025 it could only partially offset the headwinds from tightening margins.

Meanwhile, net fee and commission income has continued growing in recent 
quarters, albeit at a slowing pace. Following strong growth throughout 2024, the 
year-on-year rise in trailing net fee and commission income decelerated somewhat in 
the first two quarters of 2025. Lower growth rates of fee income earned from payment 
services, asset management and wholesale banking activities, as well as higher fee 
expenses, all contributed to the slowdown (Chart 3.2 panel c). The smaller 
contribution of payment service fees was mainly due to the slower growth of credit 
card fees, while the growth of fees from asset management and wholesale banking 
was negatively affected by the slower growth of assets under management and higher 
market volatility respectively.

Banks are maintaining their cost efficiency, although some diverging trends are 
evident across countries. The growth of total operating costs has picked up since 
early 2024, driven by both staff and non-staff costs. However, the rate of cost growth 
stabilised in the second quarter of 2025 as staff cost pressures eased somewhat, 
while contributions to resolution funds and deposit guarantee schemes continue to 
have a negative effect (Chart 3.3, panel a). Banks’ cost efficiency, as measured by the

cost/assets ratio, has been broadly stable in the past few quarters, albeit with some 
divergence across countries, as less cost-efficient banking sectors have seen this 
ratio increase (Chart 3.3, panel b).

Banks’ aggregate provisioning costs have remained broadly stable, despite 
provisioning trends varying across countries. The ratio of loan loss provisions to 
total loans has been hovering around 30 basis points over the last few quarters and 
remained significantly below its longer-term average for several years. However, the 
overall stability of provisioning costs masks contrasting developments. Provisioning 
costs in countries with higher initial non-performing loan (NPL) ratios have continued 
to decline while edging up in countries with historically lower NPL ratios (Chart 3.3, 
panel c). This mirrors diverging asset quality trends across these country groups (see 
Section 3.3).

The near-term outlook for banks’ earnings has improved over the course of 
2025, but some downside risks remain. Analysts’ full-year ROE projections for 
2025 and 2026 have been on an upward trend since the turn of the year (Chart 3.4, 
panel a, left graph), mainly driven by an upgrade of revenue expectations, in particular 
from non-interest income streams (Chart 3.4, panel a, right graph). The downward 
revision of loan loss provision estimates has also contributed to a better earnings 
outlook, albeit to a lesser extent. That said, these benign profitability projections 
remain subject to downside risks. Weaker than expected growth could cause 
provisioning costs to rise and contribute to weaker net interest income through

negative volume effects. Some components of non-interest income (e.g. fee income 
from asset management) could be adversely affected by abrupt increases in financial 
market volatility.

The equity valuations of euro area banks have been boosted by upgrades of 
their near-term profitability outlook, but remain vulnerable to negative earnings 
surprises. Since early 2025, the share prices of euro area banks have significantly 
outperformed the broader market. Both the price-to-book and the long-term 
price/earnings ratios of large listed euro area banks have reached their highest levels 
since before the 2008-09 global financial crisis (Chart 3.4, panel b). During 2025 
rising share prices have been mainly driven by improving earnings and dividend 
expectations (Chart 3.4, panel c). In addition, reduced equity risk premia have 
supported the increase in bank share prices, as also seen in the decline in the cost of 
equity (Chart 3.12, panel a). Despite these aggregate improvements, there is still a 
marked dispersion of bank valuations. Around one-quarter of large listed banks (in the 
EURO STOXX Banks index) had a price-to-book ratio below 1 in mid-November, 
mainly due to weaker profitability prospects compared with their peers. Looking 
ahead, bank valuations are vulnerable to earnings disappointments, should revenues

grow less than expected or loan loss provisions rise more than currently anticipated 
due to higher credit risk.

Bank bond financing conditions have continued to improve since the spring, as 
the effects of tariff announcements have waned. Secondary market yields have 
continued to move down from the levels seen in April. This has mainly been driven by 
a compression in credit spreads which, with the exception of covered bonds, now 
stand at the lowest level since the start of the hiking cycle and are particularly tight for 
the most junior instruments (Chart 3.5, panel a). Primary market issuance has also 
rebounded strongly after the widespread decline in issuance volumes between March 
and April. Year-to-date issuance is now largely in line with historical averages for bank 
bonds denominated in both euro and foreign currency (Chart 3.5, panel b). Banks are 
benefiting from tighter spreads, which partly reflect a fundamental reduction in credit 
risk thanks to higher capitalisation and resilient earnings. However, the low levels and 
limited dispersion of spreads across seniorities raise concerns about the potential 
effects of an abrupt market repricing (see Chapter 2).

Deposit rates have declined further, as banks maintain deposit franchise value 
which supports their net interest income. Following the first ECB interest rate cut in 
June 2024, banks started lowering deposit rates (Chart 3.6, panel a). The decline was 
stronger for term deposits, which have reacted in line with previous monetary policy 
cycles and shown greater sensitivity to rate cuts than rate hikes. By contrast, changes

to overnight deposit rates have been sluggish in either direction, and household 
deposit rates offered by many banks are still just marginally above zero.43 Although 
the pass-through is slowly increasing over time, overall deposit rate sensitivity has 
been weaker during this cycle than in previous ones (Chart 3.6, panel b).44 With the 
rise in interest rates, the deposit franchise has again become an important source of 
income, especially during the hiking phase of the cycle. Even now, with policy rates at 
half their peak levels, banks’ deposit funding substantially supports their income and is 
likely to remain a source of profit as long as interest rates remain moderately positive 
(Chart 3.6, panel c).45

43 
However, a handful of banks are offering substantially higher overnight deposit rates. These banks use a 
funding mix skewed towards market-based sources and might therefore still benefit from attracting 
overnight household deposits, even at much higher rates.

44 This is mainly driven by the high share of household overnight deposits in total deposits. The sluggish 
pass-through on overnight deposits can be partly attributed to the zero lower bound on deposit rates 
during the negative interest rate environment, but also to limited competition for deposits in an abundant 
liquidity environment. Notwithstanding, the overall pass-through of monetary policy tightening through 
banks was strong and comparable to other cycles (see also the box entitled “Monetary dynamics during 
the tightening cycle”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2023, and “Report on monetary policy tools, 
strategy and communication”, Occasional Paper Series, No 372, ECB, 2025).

45 See also the box entitled “The deposit franchise value of euro area banks”, Financial Stability Review, 
ECB, May 2025.

Banks’ deposit volumes are increasing, with renewed inflows into retail 
overnight deposits. With the start of the hiking cycle, banks increased deposit term 
spreads and depositors reacted by reallocating funds from overnight deposits to term 
deposits. However, following the first rate cut, deposit flows have reversed again, 
leading to a further accumulation of overnight deposits. As a result, the ratio of term to 
overnight deposits remains low by historical standards (Chart 3.7, panel a).46 This 
benefits banks as it skews their funding composition towards the cheapest source of 
funding. However, the renewed growth in overnight deposits likely reflects a shift in the 
preference of the non-financial private sector for more liquid assets resulting from the 
increase in economic uncertainty. While competition for deposits is currently limited by 
the abundance of cheap overnight deposits, which reduces the risk of a of a sudden 
increase in the cost of deposit funding, economic uncertainty could create volatility in 
deposits and revive competition for deposits.

A growing reliance on funding from non-bank financial intermediaries could 
become a vulnerability in times of market stress. Over the past year, banks have 
seen a strong increase in their market-based funding (Chart 3.7, panel b). This 
funding is usually provided by non-bank financial intermediaries which invest in bank 
bonds, deposit their funds in bank accounts and lend to banks in the repo market. This 
growing interlinkage leaves banks at higher risk of funding disruptions, should these

counterparties be forced to deleverage in times of market stress (see Special 
Feature B). Moreover, repo market intermediation by euro area banks has also 
increased, more than doubling over the last four years. A substantial portion of these 
transactions is denominated in foreign currency and has a very short maturity, with 
limited substitutability of funding providers. This increases banks’ reliance on their own 
foreign currency liquid asset holdings to manage potential funding disruptions and 
may amplify asset price gyrations (see Box 3).

The US dollar assets and liabilities of euro area banks arise mainly from their capital market 
activities. Capital market activities are often characterised by short maturities and require daily 
marking to market and margining. These features may pose a liquidity risk to banks in the event of 
abrupt market movements. US dollar funding and hedging instruments provided by banks are also 
important for euro area corporates and non-bank financial institutions, especially when exchange 
rates move rapidly. This box presents the business rationale for euro area banks’ US dollar activities 
and aims to assess the associated financial stability risks.

While asset-liability mismatch appears to be limited in extent, banks are nonetheless taking 
liquidity risk due to mismatches between counterparties providing and receiving funding. 
Some banks mitigate liquidity risks further by running maturity-matched repo books and do not use 
volatile short-term repos to fund illiquid long-term assets. However, these strategies do not fully 
eliminate liquidity risk. While banks hold sizeable quantities of high-quality liquid assets, dollar 
outflows in an extreme scenario could exhaust their capacity to raise cash through repos, FX swaps 
and the sale of such assets.51 The value of liquid assets may also decline in these circumstances, 
exacerbating liquidity pressures.52 Although net outflows of US dollars could be covered by US dollar 
liquid assets in the long term, the net outflows are concentrated in the short term. Some banks may 
require additional funding in US dollars or rely on inflows of US dollars from maturing short-term 
assets to remain liquid during financial stress (Chart B, panel b). However, collecting these cash 
inflows would imply that they reduce US dollar funding to counterparties.

Maintaining adequate balance sheet capacity is necessary to enable banks to act as shock 
absorbers. If euro area banks reduce their dollar intermediation, their counterparties could face

51 Tensions in FX swap markets may add to liquidity pressures arising from outflows, raise roll-over costs 
and tighten US dollar liquidity at the bank level, contributing to a tighter credit supply. See Eguren‐Martin, 
F., Ossandon Busch, M. and Reinhardt, D., “Global Banks and Synthetic Funding: The Benefits of 
Foreign Relatives”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 56(1), 2024, pp. 115-152.

difficulties funding or hedging dollar-denominated investments and may need to sell such assets. 
Capital and US dollar liquidity buffers provide the balance sheet space required by banks to offer 
financial services in US dollars to their counterparties in times of financial stress. Capital headroom 
could be needed to absorb the increase in capital requirements associated with higher currency 
volatility and counterparty credit risk. Although liquidity risk may not materialise in banks’ own balance 
sheets and there is no regulatory requirement for banks to match the currencies of liquid assets to the 
currencies of liabilities, banks should hold liquid US dollar assets to counterbalance outflows and act 
as a stabilising intermediary.

3.3 
Asset quality remains sound in aggregate, but some 
sectors and countries have seen a slight deterioration

Despite a challenging macroeconomic environment, bank asset quality remains 
sound, with the aggregate non-performing loan (NPL) ratio close to historical 
lows. The aggregate NPL ratio dropped slightly in the first half of 2025. This was 
caused by declines in stocks of household NPLs (Chart 3.8, panel a) driven largely by 
improvements in the quality of residential real estate loans. Furthermore, the 
aggregate Stage 2 ratio also fell slightly (by around 0.3 percentage points) over the 
same period, while early arrears − loans that are less than 90 days past due − have 
shown modest improvements since the middle of 2024.

Chart 3.8 
The aggregate NPL ratio has dropped slightly due mainly to falling NPL stocks in the 
household sector, while there are tentative signs of improvement in CRE loan quality

There have been tentative signs of improvement in the quality of commercial 
real estate (CRE) loans in recent quarters. After eight consecutive quarters of net 
NPL inflows in CRE lending, the last two quarters show net flows hovering around zero 
(Chart 3.8, panel b), which likely reflects a recovery in the CRE sector amid easing 
financial conditions (see Section 1.5). However, weakness in CRE portfolios persists 
in some countries where CRE NPL ratios have seen substantial increases year on 
year. Persistent vulnerabilities in the non-prime and office markets, which continue to 
face a challenging outlook, may lead to a reversal in this improvement.

Chart 3.9 
SME and consumer loans continue to show signs of a mild deterioration in asset 
quality

At the same time, SME loan portfolios continue to experience some limited 
deterioration. Default rates for lending to small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) have been increasing consistently for the past three years (Chart 3.9, 
panel a) in line with rising corporate insolvencies (see Overview). In aggregate, they 
now stand above pre-pandemic levels. However, these overall trends conceal 
significant cross-country differences. SMEs in Germany, Italy and the Netherlands 
have experienced rising default rates in recent years, in contrast with declines in 
several other countries. Similarly, while the aggregate NPL ratio for SME loans has 
only edged up slightly since late 2023, developments in NPL ratios have varied greatly 
across countries. In particular, increases in NPL stocks in countries with low NPL 
ratios at the end of 2021 have been almost fully offset by declines in countries with 
high initial NPL ratios (Chart 3.9, panel a), due for instance to disposals or write-offs. 
Going forward, banks in those countries which have recently experienced rising NPLs

and also have a weaker macroeconomic outlook face a risk of further deterioration in 
SME loan quality.

In the household sector, consumer lending has shown signs of a mild 
deterioration in asset quality in recent quarters. This is evidenced by a gradual, 
albeit contained, rise in aggregate NPL ratios for consumer loans since late 2023. By 
borrower location, the composition of consumer loan NPLs has shifted slightly towards 
euro area exposures since late 2023 (Chart 3.9, panel b). While aggregate 
unemployment remains low, these developments, along with the recent slowdown of 
real wage growth, suggest that a subset of consumers with lower incomes could 
become financially constrained. This is particularly the case if economic conditions 
were to weaken more than currently expected, possibly leading to a further 
deterioration of asset quality in this loan portfolio.

Corporate credit risk may yet materialise in the context of rising trade 
fragmentation, a still weak macroeconomic environment and elevated debt 
service costs. In particular, banks with higher exposures to firms operating in sectors 
more reliant on US export markets face greater credit risk. As of April 2025, 8% of euro 
area banks’ NFC lending was directed towards sectors with a high reliance on the US 
market, but the share of lending at risk varied materially across sectors and countries. 
Banks with higher exposures to these sectors could face a deterioration in asset 
quality through both direct credit losses and second-round effects, such as knock-on 
impacts on suppliers, and a broader macroeconomic slowdown.53 Furthermore, euro 
area corporates continue to face elevated, albeit somewhat declining, debt service 
costs. This may add to credit risk (see Section 1.3), in particular if coupled with 
weaker corporate profitability due to lower external demand.

Provisioning coverage levels remain broadly stable, but an upward adjustment 
of provisions may be needed if credit risk deteriorates. The share of NPLs 
covered by provisions has shown signs of stabilisation in recent quarters, although 
both the provisioning and total coverage of NPLs (also including collateral and 
financial guarantees) remain below the levels seen at the end of 2021 (Chart 3.10, 
panel a). Banks’ aggregate cost of risk dropped slightly in the second quarter of 2025, 
driven by lower Stage 3 provisions in line with a slight moderation of realised credit 
losses. At the same time, early-stage provisions − i.e. those for Stage 1 and Stage 2 
loans − have edged up in recent quarters (Chart 3.10, panel b). This may be a sign 
that banks are taking account of the evolving macro-financial environment, which is 
characterised by heightened geopolitical risk and trade uncertainty. However, the 
volume of Stage 1 and Stage 2 provisions remains very low, indicating that banks are 
not expecting a substantial increase in credit losses over the medium term. 
Cost-of-risk trends have also diverged somewhat across sectors since late 2023, with 
a gradual rise for NFC loans up to the first quarter of 2025 contrasting with a slight 
decline for household loans. Looking ahead, banks could see their provisioning costs 
rise, in particular in countries where the macroeconomic outlook is weaker.

3.4 
Liquidity and capital buffers remain ample

Sovereign bonds are replacing central bank reserves in banks’ liquidity buffers. 
Banks have purchased larger amounts of bonds issued by EU sovereigns amid the 
normalisation of the ECB’s balance sheet and the concomitant decline in excess 
reserves (Chart 3.11, panel a). As a result, banks’ aggregate liquidity coverage ratios 
have remained largely stable of late. Notwithstanding their recent declines, holdings of 
excess reserves remain higher than pre-pandemic levels and are relatively evenly 
distributed across banks (Chart 3.11, panel b). From a repricing risk perspective, 
even a large and widespread increase in credit spreads on banks’ sovereign bond 
portfolios would have a limited impact on their solvency, liquidity and profit metrics 
(Chart 3.11, panel c). But the effects could become more meaningful significant as 
banks absorb further sovereign bond issuance and their excess reserve buffers 
shrink.

Banks’ earnings now allow them to increase their capital while also meeting 
shareholder return requirements. For the first time in a decade, the return on equity 
of listed euro area banks has surpassed their cost of equity, driven by continually 
improving earnings and a decline in risk premia that has translated into lower returns 
required by shareholders (Chart 3.12, panel a, and Section 3.1). This allows banks to 
reconcile higher payouts with capital generation, as retained earnings have continued 
to bolster capital ratios and buffers (Chart 3.12, panel b).54 Capital accumulation has 
increased the sector’s resilience and enables banks to absorb shocks in an adverse 
macro-financial scenario, as confirmed by the results of the 2025 EU-wide stress test 
coordinated by the European Banking Authority and the ECB’s macroprudential stress 
test extension report.55 However, the aggregate picture masks the fact that a number 
of banks are still struggling to meet their cost of equity, given compressed earnings. 
Moreover, should the recent decline in core revenues indicate a turning point for 
profitability, some banks may once again face a trade-off between shareholder 
remuneration and the internal capital generation needed to meet credit demand.

3.5 
Preserving bank resilience continues to be the primary 
goal of macroprudential policy in an uncertain environment

The euro area banking sector is resilient to adverse shocks, on the back of 
strong capital positions and effective macroprudential policies. The results of 
the 2025 EU-wide stress test show that euro area banks are generally well capitalised 
and capable of withstanding adverse shocks.56 This can be attributed in part to the 
macroprudential policy measures implemented in recent years, which have helped to 
bolster the resilience of the banking sector. Since the previous edition of the Financial 
Stability Review, two more countries have increased their countercyclical capital 
buffers, bringing the level of releasable capital buffer requirements in banking union 
countries to 0.84% of risk-weighted assets.57 These macroprudential buffers enhance 
the authorities’ ability to strengthen banks’ capacity to provide lending via buffer 
releases when facing adverse shocks, including those arising from the international 
economic environment.

Maintaining the current level of resilience in the banking sector is essential, as 
geopolitical and trade uncertainty remain elevated. Current releasable capital 
buffer requirements should be maintained to preserve bank resilience, while targeted 
increases in buffer rates could still be considered in countries with low releasable 
buffers, provided that the risk of procyclicality remains low.58 At the same time, it is 
important to ensure that borrower-based measures are properly calibrated to maintain 
sound lending standards, particularly in countries experiencing strong increases in 
residential real estate prices. Finally, given the high degree of uncertainty, 
macroprudential policy must remain agile and adaptable to changing conditions.

Macroprudential policy should remain firmly focused on safeguarding financial 
stability, thereby benefiting the economy without compromising the banking 
sector’s competitiveness as measured by profit efficiency.59 While it has been 
argued that higher capital requirements restrict credit supply and weaken banks’ 
competitiveness,60 recent empirical evidence is not in line with this view. For example, 
post-pandemic studies suggest that increases in capital requirements have only 
modest effects on lending when banks are profitable and well capitalised.61 
Furthermore, empirical analyses have been conducted to estimate whether the overall 
capital requirement (OCR) and the CET1 capital ratio affect bank competitiveness, 
measured by how efficiently they generate profits. A bank is considered more profit 
efficient than its European peers if it earns higher profits using a similar mix of inputs. 
The evidence shows that the OCR does not have a significant impact on profit 
efficiency (Chart 3.13, panel a).62 Moreover, higher CET1 capital ratios improve profit 
efficiency for banks that are not as well capitalised, as they benefit from lower funding 
costs and reduced earnings volatility (Chart 3.13, panel b).63 By strengthening 
resilience and credit provision throughout the cycle and by limiting risk taking, 
macroprudential buffers help to ensure financial stability and thus boost banks’ 
long-term competitiveness. Importantly, research also shows that appropriate 
macroprudential policy reduces the probability and impact of a banking crisis and

58 As noted in the Governing Council statement on macroprudential policies of 7 July 2025, a targeted 
recalibration or simplification of macroprudential measures may also be considered when such actions 
would not substantially reduce the overall resilience of the banking sector.

62 Confidence intervals for all point estimates in Chart 3.1, panel a) overlap almost fully, illustrating that 
there is no statistically significant relationship between the level of capital requirements and profit 
efficiency.

attenuates real estate booms, both of which are harmful to economic productivity.64 
These findings underline the fact that effective macroprudential policy can help to 
enhance, rather than jeopardise, the euro area’s competitiveness and productivity in 
the economy.

Notable progress has been made regarding the Fundamental Review of the 
Trading Book and the review of the Crisis Management and Deposit Insurance 
(CMDI) framework. In June 2025 the European Commission adopted a new

64 Banking crises severely hinder productivity through the imposition of credit constraints, disruption to 
innovation and the destruction of labour productivity via wage scarring, for example. See Oulton, N. and 
Sebastiá-Barriel, M., “Effects of Financial Crises on Productivity, Capital and Employment”, The Review 
of Income and Wealth Paper, Vol. 63, Issue 1, 2017, pp. S90-S112, and Redmond, M. and Van 
Zandweghe, W., “The Lasting Damage from the Financial Crisis to U.S. Productivity”, Economic Review, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Vol. 101, 2016. Similarly, booms – particularly those in real estate 
– negatively affect productivity by misallocating credit and other economic resources away from 
productive economic activity and towards speculation in real estate (see, for example, Müller, K. and 
Verner, E., “Credit Allocations and Macroeconomic Fluctuations”, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 
91, Issue 6, 2024, pp. 3645-3676; Basco, S. et al., “House Prices and Misallocation: The Impact of the 
Collateral Channel on Productivity”, The Economic Journal, Vol. 135, 2025; and Chakraborty, I. et al., 
“Housing Price Booms and Crowding-Out Effects in Bank Lending”, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 
31, Issue 7, 2018, pp. 2806-2853, among others).

delegated act65 postponing the application of the Fundamental Review of the Trading 
Book by one additional year, until 1 January 2027.66 This decision was taken with a 
view to preserving an international level playing field, given that some major global 
jurisdictions have delayed the implementation of Basel III still further. At the same 
time, the European Parliament and the Council have reached agreement on the 
review of the CMDI framework. This marks a significant milestone on the path to 
completing the banking union and represents a step forward in strengthening the EU’s 
bank resolution framework. The revised framework could significantly contribute to 
safeguarding financial stability and protecting depositors, while preventing the burden 
falling on taxpayers when banks fail. It will make it easier for the authorities to manage 
bank crises by improving access to resolution funding for smaller and medium-sized 
banks. The ECB has called for the revised framework to be adopted swiftly. Looking 
ahead, the conclusion of the CMDI review should allow further progress to be made 
towards completing the banking union (including the European deposit insurance 
scheme) and establishing an EU-level framework for liquidity in resolution.

The ECB is committed to reducing unwarranted complexities in regulation, 
supervision and reporting while maintaining resilience and compliance with 
international standards. The resilience of the EU banking sector has been 
demonstrated by its stability during recent crises like the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
banking turmoil of March 2023. This resilience is largely the result of the global 
regulatory reforms implemented in the wake of the global financial crisis. These 
reforms have strengthened both the quality and the quantity of banks’ capital and 
enhanced their liquidity positions.67 However, they have also increased the complexity 
of the regulatory framework and added to the compliance burden faced by banks. 
While the regulatory framework reflects the inherent intricacy of bank business 
models, undue regulatory complexity needs to be minimised. Recognising this, the 
ECB has set up the High-Level Task Force on Simplification, comprising the ECB’s 
Vice-President and five governors of euro area national central banks as well as an 
ECB representative to the ECB’s Supervisory Board. The Task Force is working on 
ways to simplify the regulatory framework and streamline reporting requirements and 
supervisory processes. The goal is to eliminate overlaps and inefficiencies while 
maintaining the current level of resilience in the banking sector, ensuring that 
prudential objectives continue to be met effectively, and adhering to international 
standards. The Task Force aims to conclude its work by the end of 2025. At that point, 
any final proposals will be presented to the European Commission.

The ECB emphasises the need for progress on the review of the EU 
macroprudential framework by the European Commission, incorporating any 
proposals set out by the Task Force. The review should focus on promoting the

67 Research by the ECB and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision shows that the benefits derived 
from these reforms since the global financial crisis outweigh their costs. See Budnik, K., Dimitrov, I., 
Gross, J., Lampe, M. and Volk, M., “Macroeconomic impact of Basel III finalisation on the euro area”, 
Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 14, ECB, 2021, and “Evaluation of the impact and efficacy of the Basel III 
reforms”, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2022.

consistent use of macroprudential tools across Member States, making 
implementation procedures more effective and enhancing information sharing among 
authorities. The ECB supports any revisions that enable the authorities to build up 
releasable capital buffers in a timely manner to strengthen banks’ resilience in an 
uncertain macro-financial environment. At the same time, the ECB acknowledges that 
overlaps between risk-weighting, leverage-ratio and resolution requirements could 
limit the usability of some capital buffers in scenarios where materialised losses are 
large and widespread. In this context, the forthcoming proposals should take a holistic 
approach to prudential and resolution requirements, ensuring that capital buffers can 
be used and released more easily.68

4.1 
The non-bank financial sector remains vulnerable to 
valuation shocks

The non-bank financial intermediation (NBFI) sector is an important provider of 
funding to the euro area real economy and its governments. The financing of 
non-financial corporations (NFCs) by non-banks has expanded steadily over the past 
decade and now accounts for an estimated share of up to 37% of euro area NFC

credit, depending on the measure used.69 Ten years ago the figure was around 33%, 
while twenty years ago it was only 20%. Although business models and investment 
portfolios vary across the diverse NBFI ecosystem, the sector as a whole remains a 
stable source of funding for euro area governments, holding about 27% of euro area 
sovereign debt. Non-banks are particularly important for long-term government 
financing. The NBFI sector holds about 40% of outstanding euro area government 
debt securities with residual maturities of between ten and 30 years, and 60% of those 
with maturities of 30 years or more (Chart 4.1, panel a). Insurance corporations and 
pension funds represent the largest euro area institutional investors in long-term 
sovereign bonds, typically holding such securities until maturity.

Chart 4.1 
Non-banks have recently increased the absorption of short-maturity bonds while 
reducing their net intake at the long end of the yield curve, indicating a portfolio shift

The recent steepening of the yield curve has been associated with a shift in the 
composition of non-banks’ bond portfolios, with weight moving slowly towards 
the shorter end. Several structural demand and supply shifts have been driving the 
recent increase in long-term sovereign bond yields in the euro area and are currently 
having an impact on the important role played by non-banks in bond markets (see 
Chapter 2). Non-banks, especially insurance corporations and pension funds, have

long been and still are a stable funding base for sovereign and corporate debt. 
However, the composition of their portfolios continues to shift slowly from longer to 
shorter maturities, despite increasing sovereign bond issuance at the long end 
(Chart 4.1, panel b). The reform of the Dutch pension system may result in a sell-off of 
bonds and interest rate swaps with long maturities as the individual pension funds 
move from defined benefit to defined contribution schemes.70 With traditional 
hold-to-maturity investors reducing their absorption of long-maturity bonds, the 
funding base of sovereigns at the long end may shift towards more “flighty” investors, 
increasing the risks to government financing posed by bond market volatility.71

Chart 4.2 
Non-bank portfolios remain vulnerable to shocks given holdings of risky assets, high 
equity valuations and tight credit spreads in their securities portfolios

Non-banks’ portfolios show signs of elevated valuations, exposing the sector 
to credit risk and the risk of sudden price adjustments. Current market valuations 
reflect significant market optimism driven, among other things, by high expectations of 
future earnings growth or a fear of missing out on gains from a continued rally (see

71 In the first half of 2025, banks, foreign investors and households were strong net absorbers of long-term 
sovereign debt securities. Such investors may not necessarily hold these securities to maturity.

Chapter 2). High valuations are also mirrored in non-banks’ holdings, with equity 
portfolio valuations now standing close to the 75th percentile observed in the past 
decade (Chart 4.2, panel a). These high valuations leave the sector exposed to 
broad, abrupt price adjustments, should investor sentiment shift or fall short of 
expectations. Furthermore, heavy concentration in highly valued US and (especially) 
tech stocks increases the sector’s vulnerability to both market-wide valuation 
adjustments and idiosyncratic shocks. The picture is more nuanced with regard to 
bond holdings. Weighted average spreads of investment funds’ bond portfolios are 
close to their ten-year low (Chart 4.2, panel b), reflecting elevated bond valuations, for 
example in the high-yield segment, but also a portfolio composition with a higher share 
of riskier bond types. In the high-yield segment in particular, overly benign valuations 
may mask significant credit risks. Insurance corporations hold bond portfolios with less 
extreme but still elevated valuations, while the valuation of pension funds’ bond 
portfolios is at the historical median, likely mirroring the relatively high share of 
longer-dated government debt securities that both sectors hold. Insurance 
corporations maintain portfolios with a significantly lower share of equities than do 
investment funds and pension funds, even though the proportion has been increasing 
slowly over time for all three types of entity.

Highly valued assets expose non-banks to sudden price shocks, with 
potentially adverse knock-on effects on financial markets. The combination of 
highly valued and concentrated portfolios with low liquidity buffers in some non-bank 
types exposes the sector as a whole to financial stability risks from market shocks (see 
Section 4.2). When highly valued assets correct quickly, non-banks can face 
valuation losses, margin calls and fund share redemptions. This would result in forced 
asset sales and reduce the ability of non-banks to make markets, potentially further 
exacerbating price declines. Risks for sudden valuation shocks may be especially 
pronounced in private equity and credit markets due to the opaqueness of valuations, 
the illiquid nature of investments and pockets of elevated credit risk in these markets.

Interconnectedness within and between the non-bank and banking sectors 
results in potentially systemic financial stability risks. Borrowing by non-banks 
accounts for 10% of euro area banks’ total assets, but 17% of banks’ liabilities are 
attributable to non-bank funding, meaning that non-banks are net lenders to euro area 
banks (see Special Feature B). Non-bank funding tends to be short term and can be 
“flighty” in times of market stress, exposing banks to rollover and redemption risks. 
Additionally, banks’ provision of leverage to non-banks exposes the banking sector to 
credit risk and could amplify market swings should banks cut lending to non-banks in 
times of stress. Finally, increasing interconnectedness within the NBFI sector means 
that risks from liquidity mismatches and high valuations in investment funds and 
private markets may spill over to insurance corporations and pension funds (see 
Section 4.2). Insurance corporations and pension funds increasingly manage their 
investments in listed equities and bonds through fund shares instead of direct asset 
holdings.

Investment fund flows have recovered from the April turmoil, especially in 
high-yield and shorter-maturity bond funds. Euro area investors’ demand for 
European equities has continued in 2025, while flows into funds holding US equities 
have remained subdued since the April turmoil, despite a slight pick-up of late 
(Chart 4.3, panel a). A breakdown of more recent flows into US-equity ETFs shows 
that investors are increasingly looking to hedge US dollar currency risks (Chart 4.3, 
panel b), while flows into high-yield bond funds have recovered strongly amid record 
spread compression (see Chapter 2). In a context of elevated macroeconomic 
uncertainty, investors have been showing a preference for short-term rather than 
long-term bond funds (Chart 4.3, panel c). This is also reflected in the recent 
steepening of the yield curve. The stalling of long-term bond fund flows mirrors the 
recent shift in bond absorption in the wider non-bank financial intermediation sector 
towards the shorter end (see Section 4.1). A less stable investor base and lower 
demand for long-term sovereign bonds could contribute to vulnerabilities in bond 
markets and increase the risk of market volatility, particularly if fiscal positions in some 
euro area countries were to deteriorate further.

Chart 4.3 
Investment fund flows into risky assets recover from the April trade shock amid 
increasing demand for currency-hedged US equities and shorter-maturity bonds