COVID-19 has severely affected the Thai economy, which was already weakening even prior to the 
global outbreak. US-China trade tensions, domestic political uncertainty and the ongoing drought caused 
growth to slow in 2019 and early 2020. While the spread of COVID-19 was successfully contained within 
Thailand’s borders for most of 2020, the economic impact has been pronounced. Weak global demand, a near
cessation of international tourist arrivals, and domestic mobility restrictions have depressed goods and 
services exports and private consumption. Private investment has also declined amid continued uncertainty 
around the medium-term outlook for exports and growth.

While signs of improvement have emerged in the most recent national accounts data, the second 
surge in COVID-19 cases is likely to constrain the recovery in the near-term. The economy contracted
by 6.4 percent (yoy) in 2020 Q3, a smaller fall than the 12.1 percent contraction in Q2. Services exports 
remained very weak, but an easing of mobility restrictions and government stimulus provided some support,
as did an agricultural sector slowly recovering from drought. Nevertheless, the economy is expected to have 
shrunk by 6.5 percent in 2020. This is an upward revision from the 2020 forecast in October, reflecting the 
stronger-than-expected Q3 performance and Thailand’s success in containing COVID-19 throughout most
of the year. Core price inflation resumed in Q3 (after prices declined in the previous quarter) reflecting 
increased domestic demand and the expiration of discounts on electricity and water bills. However, the second 
wave of COVID-19 – which began in December – and the associated renewal of domestic restrictions is likely 
to have a negative impact on consumer spending in early 2021.

The current account surplus has narrowed sharply, but net inflows on the financial account supported 
the Thai baht and reserves coverage remains strong. The current account surplus fell to 0.6 percent of 
GDP in 2020 Q2 (from 6.6 percent in the previous quarter) due to the large contraction of tourism receipts. 
On the other hand, financial inflows associated with the sale of foreign assets and the repatriation of deposits 
held abroad have supported the local currency. Nevertheless, the baht has appreciated only modestly 
compared with the currencies of other countries in the region as of the end of the second quarter. In the 
fourth quarter, the baht has resumed the appreciation trend due to the depreciation of the US dollar.

Despite global volatility in financial markets, Thailand’s financial system remains stable, though 
there are pockets of vulnerability. Significant liquidity and capital buffers and high rates of regulatory 
compliance have meant that the financial sector has so far been able to weather the pandemic shock. However, 
increased corporate vulnerabilities and elevated levels of household debt pose significant risks, particularly 
if the economic recovery is slower than expected and debt service obligations become harder to bear. 
Household debt in Thailand is the second highest in East Asia (at 80.2 percent of GDP in March 2020). 
Though non-performing loans (NPLs) were stable at 3.1 percent of total loans at end-June 2020, they remain 
at a relatively high level. NPLs are particularly high for SMEs and could increase in the future if SMEs 
struggle to service loans provided in response to COVID-19 or adapt to the eventual withdrawal of financial 
support measures such as deferred loan payments.

With low inflation and a slowing economy, the Bank of Thailand maintained the policy rate at 0.5 
percent to support economic recovery. The BOT also implemented a series of measures to support 
financial stability and ensure that adequate liquidity is available to banks and non-financial corporates. This 
included the establishment of a Corporate Bond Stabilization Fund (BSF) to provide bridge financing of up 
to 400 billion baht as a liquidity backstop for firms with bonds maturing during 2020.

The implementation of measures to provide soft loans to SMEs - as part of the overall pandemic 
response package - has proved challenging. SMEs account for over 40 percent of GDP and around 80 
percent of private sector employment, but many have limited access to finance. As part of the government’s 
approved fiscal and financial response to COVID-19 (equivalent to around 13 percent of GDP), the Bank of 
Thailand on-lent 500 billion baht (around 3 percent of GDP) to commercial banks to fund a dedicated SME 
lending program. But the disbursement of soft loans to SMEs has fallen below expectations while overall 
credit growth to SMEs has slowed. The government has more recently revised some of these programs to 
expand coverage, address credit risk issues, and extend the time frame.

The fiscal deficit widened sharply as the government ramped up spending to mitigate the economic 
impacts of the virus on households and firms. Revenue declined in FY2020 (year ended September) due 
to the impact of COVID-19 on trade and economic activity, and policy measures including a temporary 
reduction in withholding tax and expanded payroll tax deductions for SMEs. Spending rose, mainly due to 
the roll-out of pandemic relief measures. As a result, the budgetary central government deficit expanded to 
5.9 percent of GDP in FY2020, from 2.3 percent of GDP in FY2019. The deficit was financed by domestic 
borrowing. As a result, public debt rose sharply to 49.4 percent of GDP in September 2020, its highest level 
since the early 2000s.

Progress has been made in implementing fiscal measures to support the most vulnerable. The fiscal 
response has centered on authorized borrowing of up to 1 trillion baht (about 6 percent of GDP) to fund cash 
transfers, the medical response, and economic and social rehabilitation (e.g. job-creating public works), in the
aftermath of COVID-19. Of the 555 billion baht authorized to be spent on cash transfers for households, 
farmers, and entrepreneurs, around 300 billion baht has been disbursed. Despite some implementation
challenges, the government has acted quickly to leverage existing social assistance mechanisms and set up 
new large-scale cash transfer programs to cover vulnerable individuals who would not otherwise have been 
covered. Overall, Thailand has performed relatively well compared to its peers in the region in terms of the 
scale, speed, and targeting of its response.

The economy is expected to recover gradually over the next two years, but the outlook remains
highly uncertain. Growth is projected to rebound to 4.0 percent in 2021 and pick up further to 4.7 percent 
in 2022, at which point output will return to its pre-pandemic 2019 level. Nevertheless, compared with our 
pre-COVID-19 (January 2020) projections, economic output is projected to be almost 8 percent lower per
year (on average) between 2020 and 2022. In the first quarter of 2021, domestic demand will be adversely
affected by the recent resurgence of COVID-19. But assuming that this outbreak is successfully contained,
and vaccine distribution proceeds as planned, domestic activity is expected to recover through the remainder 
of the year as domestic mobility returns to pre-pandemic levels consumer and business confidence improves,
and fiscal policy remains supportive. External demand will recover more slowly, reflecting only a modest 
recovery in global goods trade and an increase in foreign tourist arrivals from mid-2021 onwards, when
borders are assumed to gradually reopen. In the absence of mitigating policy responses, the effects of the 
pandemic on investment, human capital accumulation, and productivity may also have longer-run impacts 
on potential output.

With COVID-19 cases still surging globally, risks to the outlook are skewed to the downside. The
recovery could be slow and start-stop in nature if the Government is forced to reimpose stringent lockdowns,
if progress on developing and distributing a vaccine is slower than anticipated, or if global activity remains 
weaker than expected. Relatedly, the recovery of the tourism sector will be dependent on when international 
borders reopen, and whether hesitation to travel internationally persists, as well as the success of efforts to 
promote domestic tourism as a substitute, all of which remain uncertain. Negative impacts on potential output 
would be exacerbated if these downside risks are realized, and financial vulnerabilities associated with SME

and household balance sheets may be exposed. In such a downside scenario, growth could drop further to 2.4
percent in 2021.

Besides COVID-19, several other sources of domestic and external risk exist. Prolonged political unrest 
could undermine consumer and business confidence, hindering the economic recovery. It will also distract 
attention from the critical policy reforms needed to support recovery and bolster long-term growth, such as 
those outlined below. The premature removal of fiscal and financial relief could stymie Thailand’s recovery,
even if the pandemic is successfully controlled in the coming months. A resumption of trade tensions and/or 
supply chain disruptions would stall the recovery of the external sector, although recently signed and 
pending trade agreements could provide some support.

The labor market faced several challenges prior to the pandemic. COVID-19 struck a labor market 
already suffering from weaknesses, including lackluster job creation, a prevalence of low-quality jobs and 
informal employment, declining labor force participation, and a rapidly aging workforce. The movement of 
workers into higher-productivity sectors has stalled in recent years, and COVID-19 is likely to have 
reinforced some of the trends inhibiting the movement of workers into higher productivity jobs.

As a result of the pandemic, hours worked fell sharply and people resorted to agricultural employment
as a safety net, likely increasing hardship for many households. The official unemployment rate doubled 
from 1.0 percent in the first quarter of 2020 to 2.0 percent in the second quarter, the highest level since 2009,
with a particularly large increase for young people. By the second quarter of 2020 there were 700,000 fewer 
jobs in aggregate than a year earlier, and 340,000 fewer than the previous quarter. Employment losses were 
widespread across sectors, but a large proportion of workers who lost their jobs in other sectors seem to have
moved into the low-productivity agricultural sector, which gained more than 700,000 jobs between the first
and second quarters, an atypically large gain even for a sector that generally grows at that time of year. 
Hours worked fell by 5.7 percent for men and 7.2 percent for women between the first and second quarters 
of 2020, reflecting a spike in zero-hour workers and an increase in workers working fewer than 40 hours a 
week. The reduction in hours worked and other labor market adjustments resulted in a decline of private 
sector average monthly wages of 5.4 percent in the agriculture sector and 1.9 percent outside of it. These
income losses likely created economic hardship for many households. Recent projections indicate that an
additional 1.5 million people may have entered poverty in 2020 due to the economic impacts of COVID-19,
based on a poverty line of US$5.50 (2011 PPP) per day.

Some of these employment impacts moderated toward the end of 2020. The labor force participation 
rate increased in the third quarter and employers added nearly 850,000 jobs resulting in year-on-year job
growth of more than 1 percent. This continued in the first two months of the fourth quarter. Still, the 
unemployment rate remained elevated toward the end of 2020, hours worked have not fully recovered, and 
employment in several sectors including manufacturing remains lower than a year ago.

Thailand’s rapidly aging population will cause the supply of labor to decline, exacerbating labor 
market challenges over the longer-term. Following a fast drop in fertility rates and improvement in life 
expectancy, population aging is occurring quickly in Thailand, and at a relatively low-income level compared 
to other aging countries. The number of years for the share of the 65-plus population to increase from 7 
percent of the population to 14 percent, a measure often used to gauge the speed of population aging, was 
115 years and 69 years in high-income France and the United States, respectively, but is only projected to 
take 20 years in Thailand. The working age share of the population is projected to decline from 71 percent 
of the population in 2020 to 66 percent in 2030 and 56 percent in 2060. Without changes in policy and
behavior that improve the supply of labor and enhance productivity, this would imply a mechanical decrease 
in growth in income per capita, due to the smaller number of people working relative to the total population, 
and a decline in savings available for investment. Projections of the potential impact suggest that, absent any

adjustments, changes in demographics will decrease average annual growth in GDP per capita by 0.86
percent in the 2020s. Population aging will therefore exacerbate the negative effects of low labor productivity 
(as reflected in the prevalence of low-quality jobs) and declining labor force participation on national income.

Productivity improvements and increases in the labor force participation of older people and women 
can counterbalance the negative growth effects of an aging population. Advancements in automation,
digitization and other technologies may create opportunities for fewer workers to produce more and for firms
to participate in new global value chains while reviving capital investments needed to raise Thailand’s long-
term growth trajectory. Increasing health and education levels and changes to the nature of work mean that 
there is also scope for labor force participation to increase.

Policy options are available to counter the effects of population aging, several of which would also
help promote a sustainable recovery from COVID-19. A resurgence of the COVID-19 outbreak in 
Thailand could require a renewed focus on employment retention policies like wage subsidies and job creation
policies like public works that could help make up for reduced working hours. As Thailand recovers from the 
COVID-19 outbreak, upskilling and reskilling programs can be combined with financial support to help 
displaced workers get back to work. Training programs can target workers from sectors severely impacted 
by the outbreak (e.g. tourism) and provide training in strategic sectors likely to grow in the near and medium
term (e.g. the care sector). Training can be provided in soft skills like teamwork and interpersonal 
communication, which are increasingly demanded by employers, and in entrepreneurship skills to help 
generate self-employment. Training can be linked to subsidies provided in the form of vouchers that finance 
training and act as a wage subsidy to promote demand or in the form of start-up support for self-employment.
These programs should be followed by longer-term efforts to strengthen the workforce development system,
including by developing an advanced labor market information system, to enhance linkages with the private 
sector and ensure that education and training matches the needs of employers. This will help ensure that 
workers acquire the sophisticated technical skills, the digital skills, and the soft (e.g. interpersonal, critical 
thinking) skills that will be increasingly demanded as Industry 4.0 takes hold in Thailand. Population aging
also creates opportunities to increase employment in the care sector, particularly in the evolving market for 
aged care, which will require both lower skilled workers and highly trained specialists and highly trained 
specialists.

Barriers to the increased participation of women and older people can also be addressed. Female labor
force participation can be increased by improving the accessibility and lowering the cost of childcare, making 
parental leave more generous, and bolstering old age social assistance programs. The working lives of older 
people can be extended by promoting flexible work arrangements and potentially increasing the retirement 
age, including through age or longevity indexing, that is, tying the retirement age to life expectancy at 
retirement age. These initiatives will need to be undertaken with the fiscal costs in mind. Some involve
minimal government action, such as disseminating good practices on flexible working arrangements for older 
workers. Others, however, imply a more significant fiscal cost. In these cases, careful evaluation of the 
effectiveness of these programs is important, likely through pilots to help determine what works. The 
effectiveness of existing schemes, such as tax incentives to promote the hiring of older workers, should be 
evaluated to ensure they are achieving desired objectives. Where ineffective, savings from these programs 
can be redirected. While costly, action is necessary to ensure that Thailand is able to recover quickly from 
the COVID-19 outbreak and to counteract the long-term negative implications of population aging on 
growth.

i. The pandemic has taken its toll on the world and Thailand… 
 
The impact of 
COVID-19 on the 
global economy is 
unprecedented.

COVID-19 has caused a global recession surpassed only by the two World Wars 
and the Great Depression over the past century and a half. Although the global 
economy is growing again in 2020 Q3 after a sharp contraction in the previous 
quarter (Figure 1), the pandemic has caused a severe loss of life, is tipping millions 
into extreme poverty, and is expected to push activity and income well below their 
pre-pandemic trends for a prolonged period. Initial stringent lockdowns have been 
partly eased, supporting the recovery in economic activity. Nevertheless, COVID-
19 has continued to spread around the world, with a sharp resurgence of infections 
in some areas, and daily new confirmed cases remain high. One bright spot in the 
East Asia region is the recovery of China (Figure 2), where infections have been kept 
at a low rate since early March 2020 (See Box 1: Regional perspectives).

The Thai economy already showed pre-existing vulnerabilities, with growth 
slowing from 4.2 percent in 2018 to 2.4 percent in 2019.1 The key drivers of slowing 
growth were both external and internal: weaker demand for exports reflecting the

impact of US-China trade tensions, slowing public investments driven by delays in 
the passage of the FY 2020 budget, political uncertainty due to the delayed 
formation of a new coalition government, and a severe drought impacting 
agricultural production. The economy was already contracting by the time the 
COVID-19 shock hit Thailand, with growth falling to –2.0 percent (yoy) in 2020 
Q1. 
 
Figure 1: The global economies picked up sharply 
2020 Q3 from the previous quarter 
Figure 2: In the EAP region, China and Vietnam have 
shown positive growth since 2020 Q2 
(GDP, % change, year-on-year) 
(GDP, % change, year-on-year)

The pandemic has exacted substantial costs on all Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (EMDE) 
regions. Although all regions are expected to grow in 2021, the pace of the recovery is likely to vary 
considerably and be weaker in countries which have larger outbreaks or are more reliant on tourism and 
industrial commodity exports. The East Asia and Pacific region is expected to benefit from a solid rebound 
in China, whereas activity is projected to be weakest in the Middle East and North Africa and Sub-Saharan 
Africa regions. Many countries are expected to lose a decade or more of per capita income gains.

Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside. In addition to region-specific risks, all regions are 
vulnerable to renewed outbreaks and logistical impediments to the distribution of effective vaccines, 
financial stress amid elevated debt levels, and the possibility that the impact of the pandemic on growth 
and incomes may be worse than expected over the longer term. In a downside scenario of a more severe 
and prolonged pandemic, the lowest growth rates among the six EMDE regions would be in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa, reflecting these regions’ 
reliance on exports of oil and industrial commodities, the prices of which would be reduced by weak global 
demand.

East Asia and Pacific. Regional growth slowed to an estimated 0.9 percent last year—the lowest rate 
since 1967—and is projected to expand by 7.4 percent in 2021. Even by 2022, the level of output is still 
forecast to be more than 3 percent below pre-pandemic projections. Whereas China is expected to recover

Box 1: Regional perspectives2 
strongly, output in the rest of the region is expected to remain around 7.5 percent below pre-pandemic 
projections in 2022, with significant cross-country differences. Key downside risks to the outlook include 
heightened financial stress amplified by elevated debt levels, and persistent policy uncertainty and subdued 
investment amid lingering trade tensions.

Europe and Central Asia. Activity in the region is estimated to have fallen by 2.9 percent in 2020. Due 
to a resurgence of COVID-19, the pace of recovery in 2021 is projected to be slower than originally 
anticipated, at 3.3 percent in 2021. Growth is projected to accelerate to 3.9 percent in 2022 as the effects 
of the pandemic gradually wane and the recovery in trade and investment gathers momentum. The 
pandemic is expected to erase at least five years of per capita income gains in about a fifth of the region’s 
economies. Economies with strong trade or financial linkages to the euro area and those heavily dependent 
on services and tourism have been hardest hit. The outlook remains highly uncertain, however, and growth 
could be weaker than expected if external financing conditions tighten, or geopolitical tensions escalate 
further.

Latin America and the Caribbean. Pandemic-control measures, risk aversion by households and firms, 
and spillovers from a shrinking global economy resulted in the region’s economy contracting by an 
estimated 6.9 percent in 2020, more than any of the other EMDE regions. The forecast for 2021 is for a 
modest recovery, reaching 3.7 percent growth as restrictions are relaxed, vaccines are rolled out, oil and 
metals prices rise, and external conditions improve. Six of the 10 EMDEs with the highest COVID-19 
deaths per capita in the world are in LAC, including all the five of the region’s six largest economies. Risks 
to the outlook remain tilted to the downside, and include external financing stress amid elevated debt, a 
resurgence of social unrest, and disruptions related to climate change and natural disasters.

Middle East and North Africa. Output in the region is estimated to have contracted 5 percent in 2020, 
as countries struggled with significant disruptions from COVID-19 and a sharp fall in oil demand. This 
contraction adds to already slowing growth in the region and compounds pre-pandemic per capita income 
losses. Growth is expected to improve to a modest 2.1 percent in 2021, as the pandemic is brought under 
control and lockdown restrictions are eased, global oil demand rises, and policy support continues. The 
pandemic is expected to leave lasting economic scars on the region, which will likely dampen potential 
growth going forward. Disruptions related to geopolitical tensions and political instability, renewed 
downward pressure on oil prices, and additional balance of payments stress are key downside risks to the 
outlook.

South Asia. Regional economic activity is estimated to have contracted by 6.7 percent in 2020, led by a 
deep recession in India, where the economy was already weakened before the pandemic by stress in non-
bank financial corporations. The region is projected to grow by 3.3 percent in 2021 and 3.8 percent in 
2022. By 2022, the level of activity is forecast to be about 16 percent below pre-pandemic projections, the 
largest gap of all EMDE regions. Risks remain tilted to the downside, and include financial distress related 
to an abrupt tightening of financing conditions or widespread corporate bankruptcies, extreme weather 
and climate change, weaker-than expected recoveries in key partner economies, and a worsening of policy- 
and security-related uncertainty.

Sub-Saharan Africa. Activity in the region is estimated to have shrunk by 3.7 percent last year, setting 
living standards in many countries back by a decade. Growth is forecast to resume at a moderate pace of 
2.9 percent in 2021—essentially zero in per capita terms and well below previous projections. COVID-19 
is likely to weigh on growth in SSA for an extended period, as the rollout of vaccines in the region is 
expected to lag that of major economies and many other EMDEs. Millions of people in the region could 
be pushed into extreme poverty in 2020 and 2021. Risks to the regional outlook are tilted to the downside 
and include weaker-than-expected recoveries in key trading partners, logistical hurdles that further

Box 1: Regional perspectives2 
impede vaccine distribution, and scarring to productivity that weakens potential growth and income over 
the longer term.

Figure B1.1: Regional growth 
The pandemic has had a devastating impact on all emerging market and developing economy (EMDE) regions, which could 
worsen further if a downside scenario materializes. The downturn has been particularly severe in Latin America and South 
Asia, which have suffered from large outbreaks, and regions more vulnerable to global spillovers through, for example, tourism 
and industrial commodity exports. In about a quarter of EMDEs, COVID-19 has reversed a decade or more of per capita 
income gains. COVID-19 is expected to leave lasting economic scars that will likely keep the level of activity from returning 
to its pre-pandemic trend.

Thailand stood out 
as a public health 
success in 
containing the 
domestic outbreak 
…

…which allowed 
reopening of the 
domestic economy.

After successful 
containment 
throughout most of 
2020, COVID-19 
cases surged in late 
December...

Thailand was particularly exposed due to the economy’s openness to both trade in 
goods and services (tourism). Firstly, weaker global demand has led to a contraction 
in global trade, which, in turn, has hit Thailand’s exports and disrupted global value 
chains, such as automobiles, in which Thailand is an active participant, particularly 
during 2020 Q2. Secondly, the tourism sector, which accounts for 12-16 percent of 
GDP, has been severely impacted with a near cessation of international tourist 
arrivals since March 2020. Finally, the mobility restrictions imposed in response to 
the outbreak, while critical to flattening the infection curve, temporarily dented 
private consumption, particularly for retail and recreational services.

Although it has had 
fewer cases of 
COVID-19 than 
other countries in 
the region, 
Thailand’s economy 
has been severely 
impacted.

ii. Thailand began to ease lockdown restrictions after successfully containing the

COVID-19 pandemic… 
 
The economy 
showed signs of 
improvement after 
bottoming out in 
2020 Q2 during the 
lockdown…

The sharp GDP contraction in 2020 Q2 marked the trough of the downturn, which 
came at the height of Thailand's mobility restrictions to contain COVID-19. The 
contraction of -12.1 percent was the biggest decline since the Asian Financial Crisis 
(-12.5 percent in 1998 Q2). As the authorities began to lift mobility restrictions in 
2020 Q2, the economy showed some improvement in 2020 Q3, contracting by 6.4 
percent, outperforming market expectations and registering positive quarterly 
growth for the first time since end-2019 due to the return of domestic demand. 
 
Figure 5: Thailand’s GDP contracted but showed 
signs of improvement amid lifting of containment

…primarily due to a 
revival in domestic 
demand amid 
reopening of the 
domestic economy.

In terms of the contribution to growth, domestic demand, in particular private 
consumption, accounted for almost all of the improvement in 2020 Q3 compared to 
the previous quarter (Figure 8). Of the 5.7 percentage point improvement observed, 
private consumption accounted for 3.4 percentage points. Public and private 
investment accounted for 1.4 percentage points; and public consumption 0.4 
percentage points. In year-on-year terms, government consumption expanded by 
3.4 percent and government public investment by 18.5 percent in 2020Q3. This was 
due to the government’s policies to contain the negative economic impacts of the 
pandemic, as well as a catching-up effect after public investment implementation 
delays in previous quarters amid the lengthy government formation process in 2019. 
Exports and imports of goods and services contracted by -23.3 percent and -20.3 
percent, respectively, in 2020 Q3 compared with the contraction of exports by -27.8 
percent and imports by -23.2 percent in 2020 Q2 (Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7: Exports of goods and services contracted 
sharply for the third consecutive quarter

Source: NESDC 
Source: NESDC; World Bank Staff calculations 
 
However, as a tourism-
dependent economy, 
Thailand remains 
exposed to the 
pandemic shock.

In 2020 Q1, around 6.7 million foreign tourists visited Thailand. By the end of the 
first quarter, as the pandemic spread within the region and the country, authorities 
closed borders to foreign travel and restricted domestic inter-provincial travel. As 
a result, foreign tourist arrivals plummeted to zero in the second and third quarters 
of 2020 (Figure 9). As COVID-19 infection rates slowed across many countries in 
East Asia in 2020 Q3, Thai authorities explored ways to safely restart foreign travel 
and introduced the Special Tourist Visa program for long-stay tourists from low-

risk countries. October and November saw the arrival of more than 4,000 tourists, 
mainly from China and ASEAN countries, under the Special Tourist Visa program 
and marked Thailand’s first step towards rebuilding foreign tourism. Given China’s 
early success in containing COVID-19 and reopening of the economy, there is 
potential to further deepen tourism flows between Thailand and China.

Domestic tourists have provided some support to overall tourism-related activity. 
The number of domestic travelers, which includes domestic tourists, picked up after 
the easing of mobility restrictions in May. Domestic tourism received a boost from 
the government’s tourism stimulus campaign “We Travel Together” introduced 
end-July 2020 (see section viii for a discussion of the measure) but remained below 
the same period last year. In addition, travel destinations were clustered around 
Bangkok, as opposed to tourism-dependent provinces, such as Phuket and Chiang 
Mai, due to lingering over concerns over COVID-19 inflections from air travel. 
Domestic tourists spending only accounts for around one-third of total tourism 
income and therefore cannot fully cover the loss of receipts from foreign tourists. 
 
Figure 9: Thailand received no foreign tourists for 
six consecutive months since April 2020

Source: Ministry of Tourism and Sports 
Source: Ministry of Tourism and Sports 
 
The private 
investment index 
showed early but 
subdued signs of 
recovery.

After easing of lock-down restrictions, the private investment index, a monthly 
measure of private investment expenditure compiled by the Bank of Thailand, and 
capacity utilization showed signs of recovery in Q3 2020 continuing into October 
and November (Figure 11 and Figure 12). This was driven by construction which 
was less subject to mobility restrictions and exhibited slightly positive growth 
(Table 1). The housing price index ticked in up in June and July 2020 in tandem 
with increased construction activity. Nevertheless, foreign travel restrictions will 
continue to weigh on foreign purchases of real estate. Purchase of commercial 
vehicles also saw improvement possibly due to increased demand for e-commerce 
and delivery services. Import of capital goods remained strongly negative reflecting 
uncertain export prospects as COVID-19 continues to spread in many trading 
partner countries.

The private consumption index, a measure of monthly consumption expenditure 
compiled by the Bank of Thailand, bottomed out in April 2020 due to the lockdown. 
It increased after the lifting of lockdown restrictions, before levelling off in the 
September quarter as many relief measures expired in July (particularly the 5,000-
baht cash transfer to informal workers) (Figure 13). Mobility relating to 
consumption activities had recovered from the lockdown in July, but dipped again 
in December with the second wave, though the decline has so far been smaller than 
for the first wave (Figure 14). The University of the Thai Chamber of Commerce's 
Consumer Confidence Index improved marginally in 2020 Q3 due to the easing of 
containment restrictions and the government stimulus package but still remained 
at a low level due to uncertainty regarding the recovery.

All components of the private consumption index trended up in 2020 Q3 as well as 
in October and November. The consumption of non-durables (e.g. consumer goods, 
electricity, alcohol) and durables (passenger cars and motorcycles) improved

gradually throughout 2020 Q3 after bottoming out in April 2020. Most notably, 
growth in the consumption of non-durables turned positive in September 2020 while 
durables turned positive in November 2020. The improvement in the consumption 
of durables may prove to be temporary if due to pent-up demand accumulated during 
the lockdown in the second quarter. The remaining two components - semi-durables 
(apparels) and services (hotels and restaurants) consumption - only improved 
marginally from the April trough and remained significantly below their levels a 
year earlier. 
 
Figure 13: The private consumption index fell in 
April 2020 due to the lockdown

Figure 14: After recovering in Q3/2020, mobility has 
dipped again due to the second wave of COVID-19 
(% change, year-on-year) 
(Change in visits relative to yearly baseline)

Table 2: Private consumption recovery remained mixed

The contraction of 
manufacturing and 
services sectors was 
less severe.

A broad-based decline across all sectors, in particular services, was observed in Q2 
2020 due to containment measures and drought. In Q3 2020, agricultural sector 
activity declined by -0.3 percent in Q3 2020 due to slow recovery from drought 
conditions compared with a contraction of -3.3 percent in Q2 2020. The contraction 
of manufacturing and services was also less severe, at -5.8 percent and -7.3 percent 
respectively in Q3 2020, improving from -14.2 percent and -12.2 percent in Q2 2020. 
Services remained the major drag on growth due to the cessation of foreign tourist 
arrivals. The contraction of tourism-related service subsectors in Q2 was partly 
offset by growth in other service subsectors such as countercyclical financial and 
insurance activities, and information and communication due to the increased use of 
digital services. The relatively faster recovery in manufacturing, alongside 
persistent weakness in services, reflects the unusual nature of the recession, which 
has shifted consumption patterns toward goods and away from services. 
 
Figure 15: The growth contraction lessened for 
services and manfaucturing.

Figure 16: Agricultural production began to pick up 
in mid Q2/2020 while price also improved. 
(Percentage-point contribution to real GDP growth, year-on-
year)

iii. Inflation 
 
Persistently weak 
inflation has 
reflected a lack of 
domestic demand.

Prior to the pandemic, inflation hovered close to the bottom end of the Bank of 
Thailand’s inflation target range of 1-3 percent over 2017-2019 due to weak 
domestic demand and, concurrently, a large current account surplus (see TEM 
January 2020). This was reflected by a substantial output gap of 3.2 percent. 
Declining competitiveness and policy uncertainty have contributed to the slowing 
of private and public investment. High household debt weighed on consumer 
confidence.

Headline inflation 
turned negative 
primarily due to the 
drop in global oil 
prices in 2020 Q2

Dynamics in headline and core inflation rates reflected various transmission 
channels—such as global energy prices and domestic cost-of-living measures--of the 
pandemic shock. The fall in headline inflation was driven by a substantial negative 
output gap (-5.8 percent) and a sharp decline in global energy and fuel prices in 2020 
Q2 as the global pandemic took hold. However, following the relaxation of 
containment measures in several countries in Q3 2020, global oil prices increased in

tandem with global activity, resulting in an increase in domestic energy prices and 
less negative headline inflation. In addition, food prices increased due to supply-side 
factors such as heavy rainfall, flood in certain provinces, and the relaxation of 
containment measures. Although core inflation moved in tandem with headline 
inflation, its dynamics were driven by different products. Core inflation fell in 2020 
Q2 due to the drop in housing and rental prices brought about by domestic 
containment measures including closure of schools and many businesses, but later 
increased in Q3 2020 due to the expiration of government measures to reduce utility 
expenses, the lifting of containment measures and increased domestic demand. 
 
Figure 17: Headline inflation fell sharply mainly 
driven by fall in energy prices…

recorded net inflows, but reserves remained adequate 
 
The current account 
surplus narrowed 
sharply in Q2 2020 
due to the large 
contraction of 
tourism receipts, 
but subsequently 
rebounded.

The current account surplus declined to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2020 Q2 from 7.3 
percent in Q1 2020 (Figure 19). This was driven by the services trade balance 
moving from a surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP in Q1 2020 to a deficit of 4.2 percent 
of GDP in Q2 2020, reflecting the large contraction in tourism receipts. This was 
aggravated by a larger deficit in primary income (from -2.1 percent of GDP in Q1 
2020 to -3.9 percent of GDP in Q2 2020) due to an increase in investment income 
payments. In Q3 2020, the current account surplus rebounded to 5.3 percent of 
GDP, driven by a sharp increase in the trade balance as goods exports recovered 
strongly while imports remained relatively low. Tourism receipts remained 
negligible due to continued travel restrictions.

Net capital inflows stood at 8.9 percent of GDP in Q2 2020 after consecutive 
quarters of net capital outflows (Figure 20). Inflows from outward portfolio 
investment stood at 2.5 percent of GDP in Q2 2020, driven by sell-offs of debt 
securities abroad. Other investment inflows, mainly deposits and trade credits, 
expanded sharply to 12.5 percent of GDP in Q2 2020 (1.3 percent of GDP in Q1 
2020). The net inflows of deposits primarily stemmed from depository corporations, 
non-financial corporations, and households that withdrew deposits from abroad to 
meet liquidity needs at home. Net capital outflows resumed in Q3 2020 at 4.0 percent

The financial 
account recorded 
net capital inflows 
in Q2 2020, driven 
by outward portfolio 
investment and 
deposits.

After significant depreciation observed in the latter half of 2019 and continuing into 
Q1 2020 as the Thai economy entered a cyclical downturn, the baht hit bottom in 
April 2020 since end-2018. The baht began to appreciate again in May 2020, 
reflecting lower service receipts, increased net inflows and a diminished current 
account surplus. The growth of goods exports relative to imports, benefited from 
external demand from China and United States, and was primarily due to volume 
effects as opposed to terms of trade effects. In NEER and REER terms, Thai baht 
appreciated by 2.1 percent and 1.8 percent respectively, by the end of Q2 2020 from 
the previous quarter (Figure 21) in line with other currencies in the region such as 
the Malaysian ringgit, Philippine peso, and Indonesian rupiah (Figure 22).4 
Subsequently, the baht and the rupiah began to depreciate again since the beginning 
of Q3 2020 due to internal uncertainties—increased anti-government protests in 
Thailand and concerns over central bank independence in Indonesia. As a result, the 
baht and the rupiah diverged from the appreciation trend of the Malaysian ringgit 
and Philippine peso. However, in Q4 2020 the baht and the rupiah resumed 
appreciation due to the depreciation of the US dollar. As of end-December 2020, the 
exchange rate stood at 30.014 baht/US$, appreciating by 5.2 percent appreciation 
since end-September 2020.

Foreign exchange 
reserves remained 
adequate.

At US$239.2 billion end-September 2020 (13.8 months of import value), Thailand’s 
foreign exchange reserves remain adequate. As of end-2020 Q2, foreign reserves 
were equivalent to 3.9 times the country’s short-term external debt and equivalent 
to 101 percent as a share of annual imports. The IMF Article IV (2019) assessed

4 The Thailand Article IV Staff Report (2019) found that current account surplus was too large due to structural constraints 
(such as high relative labor costs, slowing productivity and incomes, and an aging population) compounded by prolonged 
political uncertainty which have constrained domestic demand. As a result, the 2018 REER was assessed as around 5 percent to 
10 percent below the levels consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. Over the medium term, as macro stimulus 
is deployed and structural rigidities are addressed, the REER gap should narrow with a growth driven appreciation.

that FX reserves remained well above reserve adequacy metrics and external debt 
sustainable with limited vulnerabilities.5 
 
Figure 21: The Thai baht began to depreciate again 
from end-June 2020 to end-September 2020

v. The fiscal deficit is expanding as a result of the government’s response to

COVID-19 and declining revenue 
 
Revenue declined in 
FY2020 due to the 
impact of COVID-
19 on trade and 
economic activity, 
and the 
government’s policy 
response.

Budgetary central government revenue fell by 8.2 percent in nominal terms in 
FY2020 but declined only slightly as a proportion of GDP. The fall was driven by 
a pronounced drop in tax revenue, which was partially offset by an increase in other 
revenue from fees and state-owned enterprise contributions (Figure 24). Tax 
revenue was 13.7 percent lower than the FY2020 budget target, in part because of 
weaker economic activity and the contraction in imports and consumption. Policy 
measures – including a temporary six-month reduction in the withholding tax rate 
from 3 percent to 1.5 percent, and a reduction in payroll taxes for SMEs – also 
contributed to the decline in tax revenues. Some corporate taxes were also deferred 
in an attempt to alleviate liquidity constraints, though these deferrals were revenue-
neutral.

Government 
spending increased, 
mainly due to the 
implementation of 
COVID-19 relief 
measures.

Budgetary central government spending rose to 22.8 percent of GDP in FY2020, 
after being held below 20 percent of GDP in each of the previous three years. 
Current spending increased by 10.5 percent in nominal terms (3 percent of GDP), 
mainly due to the roll-out of COVID-19 relief measures in the June quarter (Figure 
25 and see below). Although capital spending increased by around a quarter, it 
remained low in levels terms at 1.9 percent of GDP. When measured on a cash basis, 
the capital budget remains the major source of budget under-execution, with the 
capital budget disbursement rate continuing to lag at 66 percent (while the 
recurrent budget was almost fully executed).

substantially larger than deficits recorded in the previous five years, which have 
been at or below 2.5 percent of GDP. The deficit – together with refinancing and 
rollover needs associated with the existing debt stock – was financed entirely by 
domestic borrowing. 
 
Figure 24: Revenue declined as GDP contracted … 
Figure 25: …while public spending was particularly 
high in the third quarter due to COVID-19 responses 
(Percent of fiscal year GDP) 
(Percent of fiscal year GDP)

revenues, higher 
expenditure, and the 
contraction in GDP.

Source: Fiscal Policy Office, Ministry of Finance 
Source: Fiscal Policy Office, Ministry of Finance 
 
As a result, public 
debt rose sharply in 
FY2020, to reach its 
highest level since 
the early 2000s, but

earlier. In the near term, this will be reflected in elevated refinancing needs, adding 
to those financing needs associated with the budget deficit and the COVID-19 
response (see below). Nevertheless, debt and debt service ratios remain compliant 
with the numerical limits set in the Fiscal Responsibility Act enacted in 2018. In 
particular, public debt to GDP currently remains well below the 60 percent 
statutory ceiling, although the 35 percent cap on debt service to revenue may 
constrain the government’s ability to issue additional debt in the near term (see Box 
2 on The Fiscal Responsibility Act, TEM July 2019, for a discussion of Thailand’s 
fiscal framework). 
 
Table 4: Fiscal operations 
(Percent of fiscal year GDP) (a)

(d) General government includes central government, local government and social security fund 
 
The COVID-19 
relief and recovery 
package approved in 
April 2020 was 
substantial.

Implementation of 
this package has 
already had a 
significant effect on 
fiscal outcomes.

Of the 555 billion baht authorized to be spent on cash transfers and relief measures
for households, farmers, and entrepreneurs, around 365 billion baht has been 
programmed, of which 300 billion baht (1.8 percent of GDP) had already been 
disbursed as of December 2020 (see section vii). This was reflected in a large increase
in recurrent spending in the June quarter 2020, and a commensurately large pick-up
in domestic borrowing (Figure 25).

Further 
disbursements of 
this package are 
expected in FY2021.

It is expected that a further 520 billion baht (3.1 percent of GDP) will be disbursed 
on relief, recovery and rehabilitation, and health measures in FY2021, implying
substantial additional borrowing as authorized by the COVID-19 decree. Almost 50
billion-baht worth of new measures – a new co-payment program, and a top-up for
state welfare card holders (see section vii. Policy responses) – are already being 
implemented in the December quarter 2020. Together, these measures are expected 
to boost consumption and increase growth by around a quarter of a percentage point.

The FY2021 budget 
was passed by 
Parliament in 
September, with 
both revenues and 
spending projected 
to increase.

The budget is prepared on a cash basis and is therefore not strictly comparable with 
the GFS estimates presented in Table 4. Spending was budgeted to increase to 3,300
billion baht (including debt amortization of 99 billion baht), up 12 percent from 
FY2020, while revenues were projected to rise to 2,677 billion baht, also up 12 
percent in nominal terms. By functional classification of spending, housing and 
community amenities, health, and social protection saw the biggest gains in budget 
allocations relative to FY2020. The government also budgeted additional spending 
of 40 billion baht for alleviating the impact of COVID-19 in FY2021 (see Table 5),
in addition to the ongoing implementation of the 1 trillion-baht package authorized 
last year.

vi. Despite elevated uncertainty and volatility, Thailand’s financial system remains

stable and with adequate buffers 
 
Global and domestic 
uncertainty have 
contributed to 
volatility in 
financial markets in 
2020 Q1.

of US$ -1,620 billion in debt and US$ -9,337 billion in equity flows between January 
and October 2020, driven largely by the negative market sentiment caused by the 
COVID-19 pandemic and compounded by domestic uncertainty (Figure 29).

While foreign equity outflows continued at slower pace in 2020 Q2 (Figure 29) as 
the CBOE VIX volatility fell close to its pre-COVID-19 level, the SET index 
recovered about 15 percent by end-May as domestic retail and institutional 
investors became net buyers following signs of the successful containment of 
COVID-19 within Thailand. However, from end-May to end-October, the SET 
index declined continuously by 11 percent amid rising political tensions, such as 
delays in the appointment of the new economic team to key cabinet posts and 
sustained anti-government street protests, and concerns over a protracted recovery 
(Figure 28). The government bond yield curve showed signs of steepening in the 
beginning of 2020 Q3 as sentiment regarding the recovery improved. Nevertheless, 
the bond market continued to show volatility as uncertainty over both the reopening 
of the border to foreign travel and duration of the economic recovery persisted. 
 
Figure 28: Evolution of main EAP stock indices 
Figure 29: Thailand capital flows - Net non-resident 
purchases of EM Stocks and Bonds 
(US$ Million)

Source: Haver Analytic; World Bank staff calculations 
Source: IIF Capital Flows Tracker, Haver Analytic 
 
…and highlighted 
pockets of 
vulnerability, 
particularly 
household 
indebtedness and 
SME weakness.

The COVID-19 crisis and the protracted recovery will likely exacerbate two key 
sources of vulnerability in the banking system: household indebtedness and 
weaknesses in corporates and in small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Lockdown 
measures and slowdown in economic activity have resulted in firms in certain 
business sectors and households facing immediate liquidity shortages, impairing 
their ability to service debt. Household debt in Thailand is the second highest in 
East Asia (at 80.2 percent of GDP in March 2020). Credit to households saw a rapid 
expansion over the last decade, reaching over 80 percent of GDP by 2019 from 59.3 
percent in 2010, largely driven by auto loans and housing loans (Figure 31). While 
corporate debt appears to have been relatively stable at 70.5 percent of GDP in 
20176, there are some concerns about the debt-at-risk and rollover risk. Gross non-
performing loan (NPL or stage 3) outstanding edged up to 3.14 percent of total loan 
in 2020 Q3, from 3.09 percent in the previous quarter. SMEs have been experiencing

an increase in non-performing loans (NPLs) and special mention loans (SPLs) in 
recent years. NPLs of SMEs in the manufacturing, construction, trade and real 
estate sectors appear to be relatively high, ranging from 4 to 7 percent, thus raising 
concerns about the severity and length of the current crisis as it could significantly 
impact the asset quality of the banking system.7

Despite these 
vulnerabilities, the 
Thai financial 
system remains 
stable and able to 
weather liquidity 
and solvency shocks.

Significant liquidity and capital buffers as well as high level of compliance with 
international standards have contributed to a stable and deep financial sector (see 
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) in 2019). Capital adequacy ratio (BIS 
ratio) of the Thai banking system remained high at 19.8 percent. Loan loss provision 
remained high at 782.5 billion baht with NPL coverage ratio of 149.7 percent. 
Liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) registered at 184.9 percent. The 2019 FSAP has 
revealed the improved strength of Thailand’s financial system, with the main 
financial sector vulnerabilities being largely contained. According to the stress tests 
performed by the IMF, the Thai banking system has exhibited considerable 
resilience to severe shocks, with the solvency stress tests indicating the largest 
banks could withstand a shock roughly as severe as the Asian Financial Crisis8.

Commercial banks 
tightened loan 
conditions, 
particularly for 
large corporates and 
SMEs, as economic 
uncertainty 
remained high in 
2020 Q3.

In 2020 Q3, banks’ overall loan growth slowed to 4.6 percent year-on-year, (5.0 
percent in 2020 Q2, Figure 31). Corporate loans expanded at 4.5 percent year-on-
year, but contracted quarter-on-quarter as some large corporates switched their 
funding source to bond and equity issuance. Standards for corporate loans in 2020 
Q3 were slightly tightened due to highly uncertain economic recovery particularly 
for tourism-related sectors despite credit measures designed to help SME access 
finance.9 Consumer loans grew by 4.8 percent year-on-year, and increased quarter-
on-quarter following the lifting of domestic movement restrictions and social 
distancing. In particular, housing lending expanded, consistent with an increase in 
demand for low-rise residential properties from last quarter. Credit standards for 
consumer loans in Q3 2020 remained largely unchanged from the previous quarter. 
Financial institutions deemed it difficult to assess incomes and creditworthiness of 
borrowers due to the uncertain economic conditions.

Over July-December 2020, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) held the policy 
rate at 0.5 percent to support economic recovery in the context of a slightly 
improved economic outlook following successful containment of the domestic 
outbreak and better-than-expected 2020 Q3 numbers. Previously, the MPC cut the 
policy rate from 1.25 to 0.5 percent during February-May 2020 as the COVID-19 
outbreak took hold globally and authorities imposed movement restrictions to 
contain the domestic outbreak in the first two quarters of 2020, continuing the 
monetary easing cycle that began in August 2019 (Figure 30).10 Despite growing 
pockets of risks in the financial sector, such as elevated household debt, the MPC 
deemed it necessary to lower the policy rate as the economic outlook deteriorated 
considerably.

incomes, though some of these impacts had moderated by the third quarter 
 
COVID-19 caused a 
flight to safety in 
agricultural 
employment...

Hours worked fell by 5.7 percent for men and 7.2 percent for women between the 
first and second quarters of 2020, reflecting a spike in zero-hour workers and an 
increase in workers working fewer than 40 hours a week. The reduction in hours 
worked and other labor market adjustments resulted in a decline of private sector 
average monthly wages of 5.4 percent in the agriculture sector and 1.9 percent 
outside of it.

… but the impact of 
the pandemic on the 
most vulnerable is 
likely to have been 
severe.

Although poverty declined in 2019, in large part due to government transfers, 
COVID-19 is expected to have had significant impacts on the most vulnerable. Based 
on the projected contraction in GDP, and simulations of the impact on household 
incomes and consumption, the poverty rate is projected to have increased by 2.6 
percentage points to 8.8 percent in 2020 (see Box 2). Employment impacts have been 
particularly severe for those workers working in lower-skilled jobs.

Thailand’s population is aging at a relatively low-income level compared with other 
countries. In the absence of government interventions, the resulting decline in the 
working age population will mechanically reduce labor supply and economic output 
over the coming decades. But policy measures are available to offset these effects by 
boosting labor productivity and increasing the availability of labor. Some of these 
policy measures – discussed in Part 2 of this report – can also be deployed to help 
deal with the short to medium term impacts of the pandemic.

Population aging 
will add to 
Thailand’s existing 
labor market 
challenges, but the 
negative impacts of 
aging are not 
inevitable.

The impact of COVID-19 on the most vulnerable is likely to have been severe. Around 1.5 million 
more people are projected to be in poverty in 2020 compared to 2019, with the total number in poverty 
increasing to over 5 million. Based on the upper middle-income class (UMIC) poverty line of 
US$5.50/day/person (2011 PPP), the poverty rate is expected to increase from 6.2 percent in 2019 to 8.8 
percent in 2020, before easing slightly to 8.4 percent in 2021. These projections are based on the aggregate 
GDP growth forecasts in this Economic Monitor (-6.5 percent in 2020, 4.0 percent in 2021), using 
simulation methods to estimate the distributional impacts on household consumption (as described in 
Lakner et al 2014). They also assume that the pre-pandemic decline in inequality observed between 2018 
and 2019 is reversed in 2020 and 2021. COVID-19 is expected to worsen inequality given that vulnerable 
population groups have more limited coping mechanisms, and tend to be more reliant on (often informal) 
employment in tourism and services sectors, which have been particularly hard hit in 2020.

While poverty had declined prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, this was driven mainly by 
redistribution rather than growth. Thailand’s poverty rate fell by more than 2 percentage points in 2019, 
with poverty declining in both urban and rural areas. Public assistance was the major contributor to the 
increases in consumption and income at the bottom of the distribution, with increases in wages, salaries, 
non-farm business income, in-kind receipts, and remittances each having a smaller impact. At the national 
level, the percentage of households receiving public assistance income increased from 53 percent in 2017 
to 65 percent in 2019. As an example, the Government welfare card program benefited just over a third of 
households in 2019, covering 73 percent of the poor (but also 33 percent of the non-poor).

Given that the pre-COVID decline in poverty was primarily due to increased government support, 
further sustained improvements are unlikely in the absence of more structural changes, particularly 
given the severe impact of COVID-19. The decline in poverty in 2019 reflected positive changes in the 
reach of social assistance schemes in Thailand. Continued efforts to strengthen the efficiency and 
effectiveness of social protection schemes are important, to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 on the 
poorest and most vulnerable while maintaining overall fiscal sustainability. But improvements in labor 
incomes, employment and productivity at the lower end of the income distribution will be necessary to 
ensure sustained gains in shared prosperity over the longer term.

Measures totaling 2.2 trillion baht, or 13.1 percent of GDP have been announced 
since March 2020 (not including the benefits of tax relief, lower utility bills, and 
benefits to formal workers). The approved package was larger than that in other 
East Asian countries (Box 3). A response of this magnitude remains necessary given 
that the pandemic has had relatively severe economic effects on Thailand – resulting 
from its dependence on merchandise trade and tourism – despite its success in 
containing the direct health impacts. 
 
Table 5: Overview of Thailand’s Planned COVID-19 Relief Measures 
 
Planned 
Amount 
(Bln baht)

Fiscal measures 
 
Good progress has 
been made in 
implementing 
measures to support 
some of the most 
vulnerable.

Thailand has leveraged existing social assistance mechanisms and quickly set up 
new large-scale cash transfer programs to cover vulnerable individuals that were 
not previously registered in any social protection database (Table 6). This allowed 
coverage of informal workers, who represent more than half of the employed in 
Thailand. Overall, assistance has been provided in a timely manner and there have 
been noticeable effects on consumption spending. There have been three main 
categories of beneficiaries:

Nevertheless, there 
were some teething 
issues in 
implementation, and 
the expiration of 
benefits is likely to 
have had adverse 
welfare effects.

Implementation of these programs has faced some challenges, particularly in 
determining eligibility. While many of the most vulnerable in Thailand have now 
benefitted from government support, some vulnerable groups are likely to have 
missed out, including informal migrant workers. Moreover, several of the measures 
expired in June and July, at a time when the economic impacts of COVID-19 were 
particularly acute. Informal workers and farmers may have saved a portion of the 
transfers received over the three-month period in order to smooth their 
consumption in subsequent months. Nevertheless, the expiration of these benefits is 
already likely to have had significant impacts on the incomes and welfare of these 
groups, and these impacts may persist in the absence of further targeted support. 
 
Table 6: Implementation of Key Fiscal Measures under the 1-Trillion-Baht Emergency Decree

Only a small 
proportion of 
authorized spending 
to create jobs, build 
local infrastructure, 
and strengthen 
communities has 
been disbursed, but 
spending in these 
areas is expected to 
ramp up in 2021.

Of the 1 trillion-baht package, 400 billion baht is to be spent on recovery and 
rehabilitation measures – focused on promoting domestic tourism and private 
consumption – and 45 billion baht on health care measures. Little of this spending 
disbursed in FY2020. But two recovery programs - worth a total of 50 billion baht 
- are expected to have made a significant contribution to GDP growth in the first 
quarter of FY2021 (around a quarter of a percentage point):

Overall, of the authorized 1 trillion-baht package, it is expected that a further 520 
billion baht will be disbursed in FY2021, with a significant proportion of this 
spending to be focused on recovery and rehabilitation measures. A further 100 
billion baht is expected to be disbursed in FY2022. 
 
Box 4: Social protection responses to the COVID-19 pandemic in East Asia and the Pacific16

Table B4.1 shows the spending figures associated with the different types of expansion. 
The weighted average of social assistance spending excluding China shows an increase from 0.5 to 1.3 
percent of GDP. This hides a large variation across the region with Mongolia and Thailand increasing 
spending by about 2.0 percent of GDP and Philippines and Malaysia following with 1.0 and 0.8 percent of 
GDP, respectively. The relatively low spending figure in Indonesia is somewhat misleading given the 
significance of in-kind food aid in the social assistance package. The increase in spending in Vietnam is 
notably modest reflecting the failure to meet the original target for payments to informal sector workers; 
the original planned spending would have been double the ultimate amount.

Private Sector Measures 
 
Thailand’s firm 
support measures 
focused on easing 
access to finance 
through soft loans 
and restructuring as 
well as tax relief.

SMEs, an important 
segment of the Thai 
economy, face credit 
constraints.

In 2018, SMEs contributed to 42.4 percent of Thailand’s GDP, with small 
enterprises accounting for 30 percent of GDP and medium enterprises for 12.4 
percent of GDP (SMEs White Paper 2018), and accounted for 80.44 percent of all 
private sector employment in Thailand.17 Although SMEs are an important source 
of employment and contribution to Thailand’s GDP, they lag behind larger 
enterprises in terms of access to finance. This has been exacerbated by the COVID-
19 crisis. A survey by the Asia Foundation found that 70 percent of the national 
workforce has seen their monthly income fall by an average of 47 percent, and 11 
percent of small businesses are at risk of closing permanently.18

Overall implementation of soft loans programs for SMEs have fallen below 
expectations. For instance, the implementation of the Bank of Thailand soft loan 
program has proven challenging with disbursement at 24 percent (or 120.6 billion 
Baht), possibly due to risk aversion on the part of commercial banks. Disbursement 
of soft loans to SMEs by specialized financial institutions also proved challenging: 
GSB attained 6 percent while the SME bank attained 4 percent. As a result, 
authorities moved to addressing bottlenecks in existing soft loan programs by 
expanding coverage, addressing credit risk and extending the time frame.

After the lifting of 
domestic 
restrictions, 
authorities 
improved SME soft 
loan programs 
within the existing 
response package.

- Allow companies listed on the Market for 
Alternative Investment to apply for the 
loans

i. Thailand’s economic recovery is projected to be gradual with high elements of

uncertainty 
 
The Thai economy 
is projected to 
contract sharply in 
2020.

Economic growth is projected at -6.5 percent in 2020, revised up by 1.8 percentage 
points from the October 2020 East Asia and Pacific Economic Update.19 This 
reflects the stronger-than-expected performance of the economy in the third 
quarter, due to the partial turnaround in domestic demand following successful 
containment of COVID-19. Private consumption is expected to have contracted by 
1.3 percent due to mobility restrictions, job losses and income reductions, despite 
partial cushioning through social assistance from the government.20 Investment is 
projected to have declined by 4.4 percent due to high uncertainty related to the 
pandemic, hurting business sentiment. Political tensions were also elevated, with 
continued anti-government protests since July 2020, causing further uncertainty 
and loss of confidence. Meanwhile, the external sector was depressed. Services 
exports have suffered a severe contraction as international border restrictions 
remain in place and appetite to travel is low. Goods exports have been hit by 
deteriorating external goods demand.

The forecast 
considers 
substantial 
uncertainty 
surrounding the 
pandemic and its 
associated impacts.

The outlook in this report is predicated on several key assumptions associated with 
the crisis. But the dynamics of the pandemic and hence the impact on economic 
growth remain highly uncertain. The forecast is based on the following 
considerations:

a. 
The recent COVID-19 outbreak will be relatively well-contained, and there 
will be no re-imposition of stringent domestic mobility restrictions. 
Mobility will return to pre-COVID levels and remain steady over the 
medium term. 
b. 
Slow reopening of international borders. Owing to the resurgence of new 
cases regionally and globally, the reopening of the country to foreign 
tourists is likely to be slow and gradual until the second half of 2021.21 By 
then, the government would have only granted special tourist visas to a 
limited number of tourists. 
c. 
Gradual expansion of vaccine coverage. Following the recent global 
progress in the development and rollout of vaccines, Thailand has also 
joined the same path, with the government securing a total of 63 million 
doses of vaccine to vaccinate almost half of the population. It is expected 
that vaccine rollout will be implemented throughout H2 2021. The 
availability of a vaccine is expected to bolster growth in the service sector, 
especially tourism. 
d. 
Persistently subdued global economic recovery. Following an estimated 
contraction of 4.4 percent in 2020, global growth is projected at 4.0 percent 
in 2021, with heightened downside risks.22 Global trade is expected to 
recover gradually, partly reflecting muted global investment and business 
confidence. Recovery in regional trading partners will benefit Thailand’s 
export prospects. China, Japan and ASEAN account for almost 50 percent 
Thailand’s exports. 
e. 
Stabilizing commodity prices. With the exception of the oil price, most 
commodity prices have rebounded since the second half of 2020. 
Commodity prices are projected to stabilize in the medium term. 
f. 
Scarring effect of the shock to potential GDP. The deep downturn this 
year is projected to damage potential output through lower productivity, 
investment and human capital. High uncertainty and firm closures will 
harm investment, while job loss and school closures will lead to weak labor 
supply and lower human capital.

The economy is 
expected to recover 
partially in 2021 
before accelerating 
in 2022…

Growth in 2021 is projected to rebound to 4.0 percent in 202123 before picking up 
to 4.7 percent in 2022, with GDP returning to its pre-COVID level in that year 
(Figure 32). However, even in 2022, economic activity is projected to be 6.7 percent 
below the pre-pandemic projection, a larger shortfall than that of the overall EAP 
region (around 3 percent). This is due Thailand’s relatively high dependence on the 
external sector, the recovery of which is projected to be gradual, in line with the 
weak outlook for tourism and expectations of a slow recovery in key trading 
partners. Growth in 2021 will be supported by stronger domestic demand, as 
mobility is expected to resume to the pre-pandemic level in the first half of 2021. 
Private consumption will recover as consumer confidence improves and the shock 
to household incomes is partly cushioned by social assistance. Growth in 2022 will 
pick up as confidence continues to improve and uncertainty dissipates, driving a

more robust recovery in consumption and investment. In particular, recovery from 
the pandemic and a reduction in economic and political uncertainty would help 
revive private investment in the Eastern Economic Corridor, which was developing 
quickly prior to COVID-19 but where progress has since slowed (Box 5).

Compared with pre-pandemic projections, the level of potential GDP is expected to 
be substantially lower over the 2020 to 2022 period. In 2022, potential growth is 
estimated to be 1.4 ppts lower compared to the pre-pandemic rate (Figure 33). The 
rapidly declining share of the working-age population, slow factor reallocation and 
the large drop in the GDP due to the pandemic have all contributed to relatively 
large potential output losses in Thailand. If unaddressed, lower potential growth is 
likely to constrain actual growth. Studies suggest that major epidemics have an 
adverse effect on labor productivity, which is estimated to be 6 percent lower, on 
average, in affected countries after five years. COVID-19 is therefore likely to 
exacerbate the trend decline in productivity in Thailand observed since the Asian 
Financial Crisis. However, these impacts can be mitigated through structural 
reforms, particularly in the manufacturing and services sectors.24 
 
Figure 32: Output will only return to pre-pandemic 
level in 2022

… but this partial 
rebound masks a 
loss in supply 
potential, which if 
sustained would 
constrain long-term 
growth.

The current account surplus is forecast to narrow to 0.8 percent of GDP in 2020. 
Tourism-related service exports, a major contributor to the Thai economy, are 
expected to have remained low due to ongoing border closures. Exports of goods 
are also projected to have declined substantially before recovering moderately in 
2021. This is due to continued weak global demand and partial recovery in 
Thailand’s major trading partners (such as the United States), that are still reeling 
from the COVID-19 shock.

The fiscal deficit 
will remain 
relatively high in 
FY2021, before 
narrowing in 
FY2022.

As implementation of the debt-financed 1 trillion-baht pandemic relief package 
continues, Thailand’s fiscal deficit is projected to widen from 5.9 percent of GDP in 
FY2020 to 6.5 percent of GDP in FY2021. The deficit is expected to narrow to 3.1 
percent of GDP in FY2022 as these temporary relief measures expire and revenues 
and spending return closer to pre-COVID levels. As a result of the fiscal expansion, 
public debt is expected to increase to above 55 percent of GDP in 2022 (Table ES1), 
edging closer to the statutory debt limit of 60 percent of GDP. But debt will peak 
below this limit assuming consolidation in spending from FY2022 onwards and a 
continued recovery in economic activity. Over the longer term, measures to expand 
the tax base will likely be required to ensure sufficient fiscal space for increased 
social protection and aging-related spending needs.

Monetary policy is 
projected to remain 
accommodative to 
support the 
recovery.

Monetary policy faces the zero lower bound constraint with the policy rate at 0.5 
percent, leaving little room for further cuts. In addition, the required reserve ratio 
stands at 1 percent (of previous period’s average levels of deposits), leaving little 
room for decreasing it to induce liquidity into the financial system. Other available 
monetary policy tools such as targeted quantitative easing measures will likely put 
pressure on the Bank of Thailand’s liquidity reserves. Inflation is projected to 
remain near the lower end of the inflation target. 
 
Box 5: Recent progress on the Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC)

The EEC is targeting twelve industries in the areas of health, digital, and logistics. The targeted 
industries include healthcare, medical tourism, advanced agriculture and biotechnology, next generation 
automotive, intelligent electronics, automation and robotics; aviation, defense, and education and human 
resource development. Several of these industries may be well-placed to respond to the longer-term 
impacts of COVID-19 as people and businesses prioritize their health, shift towards remote and more 
digital ways of working, and as demand for e-commerce services increases.

To improve the attractiveness of the EEC as an investment destination, connective infrastructure 
is being developed through public-private partnerships (PPPs). The use of private financing has meant 
that the impact of the EEC on government spending has to date been limited – only 22.7 billion baht (0.1 
percent of GDP) was allocated to development of the EEC in the FY21 budget. The centerpiece EEC 
projects include:

While approved investments grew strongly in the pre-COVID period, 2020 has seen a substantial 
fall in EEC investment applications, in large part due to the COVID-19 shock and the domestic 
political uncertainty. According to the Board of Investment (BOI), foreign investment applications in 
the EEC totaled 63.9 billion baht during January – September 2020, down by 52 percent from the same 
period of previous year. Total investment applications totaled 109.4 billion baht, down by 15 percent from 
the previous year, with domestic investors filling some of the shortfall in FDI. But a reduction in 
uncertainty – including via a resolution of political unrest and/or signs of a robust recovery from the 
economic impacts of the pandemic – would likely result in a renewal of foreign interest.

Over the longer term, the EEC Office has identified a shortage of skilled labor as a major challenge. 
A survey by the EEC Office found that demand for labor will exceed 475,000 workers in the next five 
years. There is an identified need for highly skilled specialists in automation and robotics, medical research, 
and digitization. The EEC Office has joined with the Ministry of Education; Ministry of Higher Education, 
Science, Research and Innovation; Ministry of Labor and others to support human resource development 
in the EEC. In 2021, EEC plans to train 20,000-30,000 people through a combination of privately-funded 
and publicly-funded courses. The EEC Office is also working with educational institutions to establish five 
excellence centers: the Chachoengsao Technical College, Phanom Sarakham Technical College (digital and 
robot center), Chonburi Technical College (rail and logistic systems), Sattahip Technical College (aviation 
and tourism), and Rayong Technical College (automation and robotic).

ii. Risks are severely tilted to the downside and fundamental uncertainty persists 
 
Pandemic-related 
uncertainty remains 
a major risk to 
growth.

Many countries have experienced a resurgence of new cases in recent months, 
including Thailand. The future path of the disease remains difficult to predict. If the 
new wave of infection in Thailand is not well contained, or if global cases continue 
to rise and progress on distributing a vaccine is slower than anticipated, economic 
activity could continue to be disrupted by social distancing measures and lockdowns. 
This would dampen Thailand’s outlook. Upside risks include more effective 
management of the pandemic as well rapid deployment of highly effective vaccines 
globally and domestically. This would trigger a faster easing of social distancing 
and a stronger recovery in activity, particularly in tourism.

This could hinder 
the recovery 
trajectory and bring 
growth down 
further.

In such a scenario where downside risks materialize, growth could drop further to 
2.4 percent in 2021 and 3.4 percent in 2022. If the government cannot contain the 
recent second wave of infection, where cases have reached record highs after several 
months, this could trigger another round of stringent mobility restrictions and delay 
the reopening of borders. Private consumption in the H1 2021 could drop to levels 
similar to H1 2020, followed by weak growth in H2 2021, supported by vaccine

rollout. Tourism sector recovery could be even more protracted as border closures 
remain in place through the end of 2021.

Fiscal pressures are 
likely to rise due to 
the pandemic 
response, but 
premature 
withdrawal of fiscal 
relief would stall 
the recovery.

The ongoing roll-out of the COVID-19 response package will see further relief, 
recovery and rehabilitation spending in 2021. While this will cause Thailand’s 
public debt to rise sharply, the debt trajectory remains sustainable. Moreover, fiscal 
risks are mitigated by the composition of the debt stock (largely in local currency) 
and the availability of sufficient domestic liquidity to absorb the government’s 
refinancing needs. At this point, the greater risk is that of weak execution, poor 
targeting, or an earlier-than-anticipated removal of fiscal support, which would 
result in a slower economic recovery. Effective implementation of the fiscal stimulus 
and relief measures approved to date is therefore a priority. A sound economic 
rationale is particularly important for the 400-billion-baht worth of ‘recovery and 
rehabilitation’ measures envisaged under the package, only a small proportion of 
which have yet been announced or disbursed. At the same time, fiscal consolidation 
will be needed over the medium-term, once the economic recovery takes hold, to 
rebuild fiscal buffers and ensure sufficient fiscal space to fund critical spending needs.

Improper targeting 
of financial support 
could take away 
resources for 
productive firms, 
and premature 
withdrawal of this 
support would risk 
the sustainable 
recovery.

In addition to the household relief measures, the government’s pandemic response 
also includes soft loans and financial support to firms. These measures account for 
around a quarter of the overall response package announced since March, but 
implementation has been weaker than expected. There are at least two associated 
risks. First, if not properly targeted at illiquid but productive firms, support may be 
provided to zombie and unproductive firms, which is inefficient and may expose 
financial sector vulnerabilities to the extent that beneficiary firms are unable to 
make repayments.25 Second, continued weakness in disbursements of financial 
support or an overly hasty or poorly communicated withdrawal - before the 
economic recovery has fully taken hold - would adversely affect even productive 
firms and may lead to unnecessary business closures and loss of jobs, putting at risk 
the sustainable recovery of the private sector. To avoid assistance being prolonged 
unduly, authorities can commit to phasing it out by linking it to observable 
macroeconomic indicators of recovery.

Prolonged political 
unrest could bring 
long-term 
consequences

Large anti-government protests have been staged since June, and there remains 
significant uncertainty as to how they will be resolved. Key demands include 
resignation of Prayuth and his government; constitutional reforms in consultation 
with extra-parliamentary parties; and reform of the monarchy. Review on the 
economic impact of political unrest suggests that the short-term macroeconomic 
impacts can dissipate quickly26. However, there might be longer term consequences. 
Consumer and business confidence have already been undermined and private 
consumption and investment could be weakened further if these protests escalate. 
In recent months, the attention of policy makers has been drawn away from the 
longer-term reforms that are necessary to boost Thailand’s potential output and 
there is a risk that this may continue.27

The resumption of 
US-China trade 
tensions will weigh 
on Thailand’s 
external sector 
recovery

If the US-China trade tensions intensify in the aftermath of the pandemic, 
uncertainty over the resolution of the trade dispute will affect regional product 
networks. Should the tensions continue, Thailand’s exports may be adversely 
affected due to negative effects on external demand and disruption in supply chains. 
This will stall the recovery of the external sector. On the other hand, gains from the 
recently signed Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership and/or other trade 
agreements such as the Thai-EU FTA could provide some upside and enhance 
Thailand’s participation in Global Value Chains (Box 6).

The COVID-19 crisis is likely to have lowered potential GDP, and further damage 
is possible if the pandemic continues for longer than anticipated. Rising debt 
acquired during the pandemic along with worsening bank balance sheets and 
prolonged uncertainty could pose further risks to the outlook for investment.28 
Job losses and school closures may have longer term impacts on skills and human 
capital accumulation.

Finally, lasting 
scars from the crisis 
could slow the 
restoration of 
potential output to 
pre-pandemic levels

Policies to boost 
labor productivity 
and participation 
can help promote 
recovery, while 
addressing 
challenges 
associated with an 
aging population.

Policy reforms that focus on increasing Thailand’s potential output are needed to 
mitigate the effects of the pandemic and promote a sustainable recovery. COVID-19 
struck an economy already suffering from several structural weaknesses, including 
a prevalence of low-quality jobs and informal employment, declining labor force 
participation, and a rapidly aging population. The second part of this report provides 
an analysis of these labor market challenges. Several policy options are outlined to 
help promote a sustainable recovery, by ensuring that workers have the ability and 
skills necessary to move into higher-productivity activities, and addressing the 
barriers to labor market participation faced by women and older people.

RCEP deepens trade and investment relations between member countries mainly through 
reductions in non-tariff barriers (NTBs) on goods and services trade. The agreement focuses on NTBs 
as import tariffs were already relatively low among RCEP members, among which there is already a web 
of existing trade agreements. It harmonizes the provisions imposed by member countries on trade in goods, 
providing more certainty for traders and investors. In particular, the agreement aligns rules of origin for 
member countries, allowing them to integrate into the same production chain. This may help RCEP attract 
a larger share of global value chains and each member country to deepen specialization. RCEP contains 
relatively strong provisions to protect intellectual property (IP) which may help allay international 
investor concerns, in particular in South East Asian countries. RCEP also covers relevant provisions in 
services, including commitments by each member not to discriminate vis-à-vis other members’ investors

RCEP is expected to benefit its members, particularly at a time of global value chains (GVCs) 
reconfiguration, while the gains for the rest of the world would be limited. The reduction in trade 
and investment barriers would increase economic integration among RCEP member countries allowing 
for significant gains from trade. This may be particularly important at a time when the reconfiguration of 
GVCs in and out of China has been accelerated by the US-China trade dispute. Recent modelling work 
suggests that by 2030 the agreement would increase the GDP of the trading bloc by 0.4 percent (equivalent 
to US$ 170 bn), while countries outside the trading bloc would see minimal overall gains. Thailand’s 
income could be 0.5 percent higher in 2030 as a result of its participation in RCEP.

However, Thailand and other ASEAN countries may benefit less from RCEP than from other 
(deeper) trade agreements. Among RCEP signatories, ASEAN countries are likely to see more modest 
gains, as the existing web of trade agreements means they have less scope to reduce trade barriers with 
other members. Economies like Vietnam and Malaysia are expected to gain more from the recently signed 
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) than from the RCEP 
(Petri and Plummer, 2020). Second-generation trade agreements, such as the CPTPP and Thai-EU FTA 
go beyond trade in goods to cover a wider range of issues such as investment, capital movement, state 
procurement, e-commerce, intellectual property, competition policy, labor and environment that are 
important for raising competitiveness. While Thailand is not a participant in the CPTPP, the planned 
Thai-EU Free Trade Agreement could also potentially stimulate exports and investment by a greater 
amount than the RCEP.

1. Introduction 
 
Thailand’s labor 
market faced several 
challenges prior to 
the COVID-19 
outbreak.

Despite low unemployment, several weaknesses are apparent in Thailand’s labor 
market. These include declining labor force participation and large gaps between 
male and female labor for participation, weak job growth particularly of wage jobs, 
and the prevalence of low-quality, informal jobs. Wage growth has also been weak.

Labor force participation was fairly steady in the 2000s and early 2010s at just above 
70 percent (Figure 34). However, people began dropping out of the labor market 
after 2013: between 2012 and 2019, the size of the labor force shrank by more than 
1.2 million people and the labor force participation rate declined nearly 5 percentage 
points. Demographics have played an important role in this shift. Decomposing 
changes in labor force participation rates into behavioral and demographic 
components shows that demographic changes – that is, changes in population share 
in a given age group with a given labor force participation rate – have explained 
about half of the decline in total labor for participation since 2010 when Thailand’s 
working age population began to shrink. Despite this decline, the current labor force 
participation rate is comparable to other middle- and upper-income countries in the 
East Asia and Pacific region such as Indonesia and China (Figure 35). Female labor

Source: Thailand Labor Force Survey 2001–2019 
Source: ILOSTAT database. 
 
Job growth has been 
weak in Thailand in 
the last several 
years.

Annual employment growth averaged 2 percent between 2000 and the early 2010s 
(Figure 36). However, job growth weakened in the middle 2010s with a brief 
recovery in 2018 before another fall in 2019. This occurred as economic growth 
stalled due to political uncertainty. Job growth in private wage employment has 
been stagnant for the last two decades: private wage employment made up 35 
percent of all employment in 2001 versus 38 percent in 2019. 
 
Figure 36: Annual employment growth in Thailand, 
2001–2019 
Figure 37: Informality rate in Thailand, by gender, 
urban and rural areas, and sector, 2019 
(Percent) 
(Percent)

and 2018. Informal employment is much more common in rural than urban areas: 
in 2019 two-thirds of employment was informal in rural areas versus around 40 
percent in urban areas. Nearly all employment (91 percent) in the agriculture sector 
is informal (Figure 37). Many people work in precarious employment. About a third 
of employment is self-employment, a share that has not changed since 2014. While 
an important source of income, self-employment lacks the stability and job-linked 
benefits of wage employment.

Private non-agricultural real wage growth averaged 1.0 percent between 2017 and 
2019 compared to 3.9 percent in the previous 3-year period. Declines in labor market 
income, particularly farm and business income, between 2015 and 2017 resulted in 
the increase in poverty and inequality observed during that period (Yang 2020). 
Wage income did not have a significant impact on poverty reduction despite 
generally being one of the primary channels of poverty reduction globally. Wage 
growth has, however, been fairly broad-based across income groups.

The COVID-19 
outbreak has 
created several 
additional 
challenges in the 
labor market.

The COVID-19 outbreak has had significant labor market impacts throughout East 
Asia. Malaysia saw an increase in unemployment and in the number of people 
outside of the labor force, Korea has seen a significant increase in labor 
underutilization, and several countries including Malaysia, Korea, and Vietnam have 
seen youth unemployment increase (ILO 2020; ILO 2020b; Rahman, Jasmin, and 
Schmillen 2020). The outbreak and the ensuing transmission control measures 
began in earnest in Thailand in March 2020 at the end of the first quarter and were 
in full swing by the second quarter, the most recent period for which the Labor 
Force Survey is available (Box 7. Labor Market Data During the COVID-19 
Outbreak). Thus far, the primary impact of the outbreak has been a spike in 
unemployment, with a large increase among young people, and a widespread 
reduction in hours worked. 
 
Box 7: Labor market data during the COVID-19 outbreak29 
The COVID-19 outbreak has affected the collection and analysis of labor market statistics. 
Transmission control measures have made data collection difficult (ILO 2020). Data analysis has become 
more complicated as transmission control measures and government employment retention policies have 
created temporary absences from work that labor force surveys are not designed to capture. As a result, 
typical measures of labor market health like the unemployment rate may not tell the full labor market 
story.

The collection of Thailand’s labor force survey was disrupted by the COVID-19 outbreak. Data 
collection, typically undertaken on a monthly basis, was suspended for the second quarter of 2020. The 
National Statistical Office was, however, able to complete the full quarterly sample between April and June 
2020 with a response rate comparable to that of the first and third quarters. Still, the suspension of monthly 
data collection may have affected survey results, including potentially hiding some labor market impacts 
like job loss or reduced hours worked if these took place temporarily during the second quarter.

Two alternative sources of information about Thailand’s labor market confirm the impacts of the 
COVID-19 outbreak in early 2020. The number of unemployment insurance beneficiaries increased 
substantially in March and April of 2020 before a dramatic spike in May. This confirms evidence from the 
Labor Force Survey that the second quarter saw some of the most dramatic employment effects from the

Box 7: Labor market data during the COVID-19 outbreak29 
outbreak. The drawback of this data, however, is that only formal jobs are covered by the unemployment 
insurance system. Job vacancies are another alternative source of information about labor market health, 
providing a proxy indicator for labor market demand. Data collected by the Department of Employment 
show that vacancy postings were significantly below their 2019 levels during the first three months of 
2020. Such postings are likely a leading indicator of labor market health since positions take some time to 
fill. After the first quarter of 2020, vacancies stabilized at slightly above their 2019 levels, consistent with 
the slower growth in unemployment insurance beneficiaries during these months, and suggestive that the 
labor market might have bottomed out in the second quarter.

Source: Social Security Office. 
Source: Department of Employment. 
 
 
 
The impact of the 
COVID-19 outbreak 
on labor force 
participation has 
been limited thus far 
though the longer-
term decline of the 
labor force 
participation rate 
reversed in the third 
quarter of 2020.

Changes in the labor force participation rate through the second quarter of 2020 
were consistent with its long-term decline with only a small drop (0.2 percentage 
point from 66.8 percent to 66.6 percent) between the fourth quarter of 2019 and the 
second quarter of 2020 (Figure 38). Changes by gender were small but opposite: the 
female labor force participation rate dropped between the first and second quarters, 
perhaps related to school closures, while the male rate increased. However, labor 
force participation recovered fairly strongly in the third quarter, increasing 1.4 
percentage points from the second quarter and 1.1 percentage points on a year-over-
year basis. The reversal was stronger for women, perhaps reflecting school re-
openings. Quarterly changes should be interpreted with some caution, as 
historically labor force participation has been depressed in the first quarter and 
higher in the third quarter, though the seasonality of labor force participation has 
moderated over time. Data from the first two months of the fourth quarter indicate 
that this recovery in labor force participation continued for both women and men. 
The result is that the labor force participation rate of 68.7 percent in November 
2020 is more than a percentage point higher than a year ago.

The unemployment 
rate spiked in the 
first half of 2020 
and remained

The unemployment rate doubled in Thailand between the first and second quarters 
of 2020 to 2.0 percent before dropping slightly in the third quarter to 1.9 percent. 
Increases were similar for women and men. While the overall rate of 1.9 percent is 
small, this is the highest the unemployment rate has been since the first quarter of

2009 during the global financial crisis and translates into nearly 740,000 
unemployed people with an increase of more than 350,000 people between the first 
and second quarters alone. The unemployment rate remained elevated in the first 
two months of the fourth quarter at 2.0 percent in November 2020 with more than 
780,000 people unemployed.