At its meeting on 18 December 2025, the Governing Council decided to keep the 
three key ECB interest rates unchanged. Its updated assessment reconfirmed that 
inflation should stabilise at the 2% target in the medium term.

According to the December 2025 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for 
the euro area, headline inflation is expected to average 2.1% in 2025, 1.9% in 2026, 
1.8% in 2027 and 2.0% in 2028. For inflation excluding energy and food, staff project 
an average of 2.4% in 2025, 2.2% in 2026, 1.9% in 2027 and 2.0% in 2028. Inflation 
has been revised up for 2026, mainly because services inflation is now expected to 
decline more slowly. Economic growth is expected to be stronger than in the 
September 2025 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, driven 
especially by domestic demand. Growth has been revised up to 1.4% in 2025, 1.2% 
in 2026 and 1.4% in 2027 and is expected to remain at 1.4% in 2028.

The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at its 2% 
target in the medium term. It will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting 
approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, the 
Governing Council’s interest rate decisions will be based on its assessment of the 
inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and 
financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of 
monetary policy transmission. The Governing Council is not pre-committing to a 
particular rate path.

The economy has been resilient. It grew by 0.3% in the third quarter of 2025, mainly 
reflecting stronger consumption and investment. Exports also increased, with a 
significant contribution from chemicals. The sectoral composition of growth was 
dominated by services, especially in the information and communication sector, 
while activity in industry and construction remained flat. This pattern of services-led 
growth is likely to continue in the near term.

The economy is benefiting from a robust labour market. Unemployment, at 6.4% in 
October 2025, is close to its historical low, and employment grew by 0.2% in the third 
quarter. At the same time, labour demand cooled further, with the job vacancy rate at 
its lowest level since the COVID-19 pandemic.

Domestic demand is expected to remain the main driver of euro area growth, 
bolstered by rising real wages and employment, in the context of resilient labour 
markets with record low unemployment rates. Additional government spending on

infrastructure and defence announced in 2025, especially in Germany, alongside 
improved financing conditions stemming from monetary policy rate cuts since June 
2024, is also expected to support the domestic economy. On the external side, while 
competitiveness challenges persist, including some that are of a structural nature, 
exports are expected to pick up in 2026. This improvement is attributed to a rebound 
in foreign demand amid declining trade policy uncertainty, despite a gradually 
unfolding impact from higher tariffs. Annual average real GDP growth is projected to 
be 1.4% in 2025, 1.2% in 2026, 1.4% in 2027 and 1.4% in 2028. Compared with the 
September 2025 projections, GDP growth has been revised up over the whole 
projection horizon, reflecting better than expected data, reduced trade policy 
uncertainty, stronger foreign demand and lower energy commodity prices.

The Governing Council stresses the urgent need to strengthen the euro area and its 
economy in the present geopolitical context. It welcomes the European 
Commission’s call for governments to prioritise sustainable public finances, strategic 
investment and growth-enhancing structural reforms. Unlocking the full potential of 
the Single Market is crucial. It is also vital to foster further capital market integration 
by completing the savings and investments union and the banking union to an 
ambitious timetable, and to rapidly adopt the Regulation on the establishment of the 
digital euro.

Indicators of underlying inflation have changed little over recent months and remain 
consistent with the Governing Council’s 2% medium-term target. While growth in unit 
profits was unchanged in the third quarter of 2025, unit labour costs grew at a slightly 
higher rate than in the second quarter. Compensation per employee rose at an 
annual rate of 4.0%. This was more than expected in the September 2025 staff 
projections and was due to payments over and above negotiated wages. Forward-
looking indicators, such as the ECB’s wage tracker and the results of surveys on 
wage expectations, suggest that wage growth will ease in the coming quarters, 
before stabilising somewhat below 3% towards the end of 2026.

Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2%, 
supporting the stabilisation of inflation around the Governing Council’s target. 
Inflation is projected to decrease from 2.1% in 2025 to 1.9% in 2026 and then to 
1.8% in 2027, before rising to the Governing Council’s medium-term target of 2% in 
2028. The expected decline in headline inflation at the start of 2026 reflects a

downward base effect stemming from energy prices, while inflation in non-energy 
components should continue to ease throughout 2026. The contribution of energy 
inflation to headline inflation is expected to remain muted up to late 2027, before 
increasing notably in 2028 driven by the expected implementation of the EU 
Emissions Trading System 2 (ETS2), with an upward impact of 0.2 percentage 
points on headline inflation. HICP inflation excluding energy is expected to fall from 
2.5% in 2025 to 2.2% in 2026 and to 2.0% in 2027 and 2028. Food inflation is 
projected to drop noticeably as the effects of prior price increases in global food 
commodities and adverse weather conditions over the summer subside, and is 
expected to stabilise at rates somewhat above 2% as of late 2026. HICP inflation 
excluding energy and food is projected to moderate from 2.4% in 2025 to 2.0% in 
2028 as services inflation declines amid easing labour cost pressures, and as the 
past appreciation of the euro feeds through the pricing chain, curbing goods inflation. 
Wage growth should continue to moderate through 2026, before stabilising at around 
3%, underpinned by a resilient labour market and productivity growth just slightly 
below 1%. Unit labour cost growth is expected to ease, although the impact on 
inflation is expected to be partly offset by a gradual recovery in profit margins over 
the projection horizon.

Compared with the September 2025 projections, the outlook for headline HICP 
inflation has been revised up by 0.2 percentage points for 2026, reflecting recent 
data surprises for HICP inflation and wage growth, with the latter leading to a notable 
upward revision to the wage outlook. The projection for HICP inflation has been 
revised down slightly for 2027. This is the result of an assumed lower contribution 
from energy inflation, since the implementation of ETS2 is now expected to be 
postponed from 2027 to 2028. However, this contribution is expected to be partly 
offset by stronger services inflation.

While trade tensions have eased, the still volatile international environment could 
disrupt supply chains, dampen exports, and weigh on consumption and investment. 
A deterioration in global financial market sentiment could lead to tighter financing 
conditions, greater risk aversion and weaker growth. Geopolitical tensions, in 
particular Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine, remain a major source of 
uncertainty. By contrast, planned defence and infrastructure spending, together with 
productivity-enhancing reforms, may drive up growth by more than expected. An 
improvement in confidence could stimulate private spending.

The outlook for inflation continues to be more uncertain than usual on account of the 
still volatile international environment. Inflation could turn out to be lower if the rise in 
US tariffs reduces demand for euro area exports and if countries with overcapacity 
increase their exports to the euro area. Moreover, a stronger euro could bring 
inflation down further than expected. An increase in volatility and risk aversion in 
financial markets could weigh on demand and thereby also lower inflation. By 
contrast, inflation could turn out to be higher if more fragmented global supply chains 
pushed up import prices, curtailed the supply of critical raw materials and added to

capacity constraints in the euro area economy. A slower reduction in wage pressures 
could delay the decline in services inflation. A boost in defence and infrastructure 
spending could also raise inflation over the medium term. Extreme weather events, 
and the unfolding climate and nature crises more broadly, could drive up food prices 
by more than expected.

In line with the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council thoroughly 
assessed the links between monetary policy and financial stability. Euro area banks 
are resilient, supported by strong capital and liquidity ratios, solid asset quality and 
robust profitability. However, geopolitical uncertainty and the possibility of a sudden 
repricing in global financial markets pose risks to financial stability in the euro area. 
Macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence against the build-up of 
financial vulnerabilities, enhancing resilience and preserving macroprudential space.

At its meeting on 18 December 2025, the Governing Council decided to keep the 
three key ECB interest rates unchanged. It is determined to ensure that inflation 
stabilises at its 2% target in the medium term. It will follow a data-dependent and 
meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy 
stance. The Governing Council’s interest rate decisions will be based on its 
assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the 
incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation

and the strength of monetary policy transmission. The Governing Council is not pre-
committing to a particular rate path.

In any case, the Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within 
its mandate to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at its medium-term target 
and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy transmission.

The global economy has shown resilience thus far despite the headwinds caused by 
tariffs and heightened uncertainty. This resilience is notably supported by 
investments related to artificial intelligence, particularly in the United States. These 
investments bolster global trade in technology products and drive gains in equity 
markets, although also raising concerns about valuations. A supportive policy mix 
across major economies has also mitigated some of the negative impact of trade 
tensions and uncertainty. Other positive developments are providing relief to the 
global economy. These include lower oil prices, easier financial conditions, lower 
tariffs and slightly reduced policy uncertainty. As a result, the global growth outlook 
in the December 2025 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections has been 
revised up slightly compared with the previous projections, although it remains 
subdued relative to its pre-pandemic average. Headline consumer price inflation 
across major advanced and emerging market economies is projected to decline 
gradually and at a somewhat faster pace compared with the previous projection 
exercise.

The global economy has shown resilience thus far despite the headwinds 
caused by tariffs and heightened uncertainty. Incoming data for the third quarter 
suggest a slight moderation in global economic activity compared with the second 
quarter of 2025. The global (excluding the euro area) composite output Purchasing 
Managers’ Index (PMI) dropped slightly since the summer months to 52.8 in 
November (Chart 1). According to this survey indicator, economic activity in 
November slowed across most major economies. In the United States, the decline in 
services activity was partly offset by an improvement in manufacturing, while China 
recorded declines in both sectors. National data releases for the third quarter broadly 
confirm the expected moderation in growth, as embedded in the December 2025 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections.

Looking ahead, several positive developments are expected to provide relief to 
the global economy. These include lower oil prices, easier financial conditions, 
reduced tariffs especially between the United States and China, and slightly reduced 
policy uncertainty. Positive economic data surprises from major economies have 
also contributed to a slightly improved global growth outlook, which nevertheless 
remains subdued relative to its pre-pandemic average. It is estimated to stand at 
3.5% in 2025 before drifting lower to 3.3% in 2026.1 The staff projections foresee 
that global growth will maintain this subdued momentum in both 2027 and 2028.

Slightly stronger global growth compared with the previous projections largely 
reflects a stronger growth outlook for both the United States and China. In addition to 
lower tariffs, the growth outlook for the United States has been revised upwards 
slightly due to more resilient domestic demand than previously expected, supported 
over the near term by positive wealth effects stemming from recent equity price 
developments and by overall higher fiscal spending assumptions. For China, real 
GDP growth projections for this year and next have also been slightly revised 
upwards to reflect stronger export dynamics than previously estimated and a larger 
assumed fiscal stimulus. The growth outlook for the United Kingdom has been 
revised downwards slightly owing to the foreseen fiscal consolidation measures.

Risks to the global growth outlook and the global inflation outlook are becoming 
more balanced as the key macroeconomic and financial risk factors become more 
two-sided. These include risks related to trade and fiscal policies, as well as risks 
related to artificial intelligence (AI) and geopolitical developments. For example, 
while trade tensions could escalate again, especially between the United States and 
China, which could have adverse effects on the global economy, the Trump 
Administration may also make progress on trade negotiations, which could have 
beneficial effects.

Global import growth is estimated to remain steady in 2025, although its 
momentum is expected to slow next year. Incoming data confirm that 
semiconductor exports linked to strong AI-related investment remained robust in the 
third quarter, especially in relation to developments in the United States. At the same 
time, trade in other goods turned out to be rather weak. Incoming data also confirm 
that Chinese export growth remains strong. Global import growth is projected to be 
4.4% in 2025, largely reflecting strong import growth in the first half of the year 
related to frontloaded demand ahead of tariffs, before declining to 2.0% in 2026 due 
to the adverse impact of tariffs. Global import growth is then projected to recover to 
3.1% in both 2027 and 2028. The outlook for global imports has been revised 
upwards significantly for this year and next compared with the previous projections, 
while the projection for 2027 remains unchanged. The stronger projected import 
growth is underpinned by lower tariffs agreed between the United States and China, 
as well as relatively strong growth momentum across emerging market economies. 
Among the latter group, India stands out in terms of its robust economic activity and 
import growth.

Headline inflation across members of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) increased slightly in November. The 
annual rate of consumer price index (CPI) inflation across OECD member countries, 
excluding Türkiye, increased slightly to 3.0% in November from 2.9% in October. 
This increase was driven by a slightly higher contribution from the food and core 
components (Chart 2).

Global headline CPI inflation is projected to decline gradually and at a 
somewhat faster pace compared with the September projections.2 It is 
expected to stand at 3.1% in 2025, 2.8% in 2026, 2.5% in 2027 and 2.6% in 2028. 
The slightly faster than previously projected decline in CPI inflation over the 2025-26 
period reflects lower than expected inflation outcomes across most advanced 
economies, lower US-China tariffs, and the reassessment of the impact of tariffs on 
inflation in the United States, which is expected to be slightly lower compared with 
the previous projections. Furthermore, weaker domestic demand in China explains a 
more gradual than previously expected increase in consumer price inflation over the 
projection horizon. This effect on the emerging market aggregate is compensated by 
slightly higher projected inflation in other major economies, such as India and 
Russia.

Perceptions of increased prospects for a peace agreement in Ukraine weighed 
on energy commodity prices. Oil prices had initially been supported in the run-up 
to the October Governing Council meeting by the announcement of new US 
sanctions on Russia’s two major oil-producing companies, Lukoil and Rosneft, which 
account for the major share of Russian exports. More recently, however, renewed

US efforts to advance peace negotiations in Ukraine have lowered the perceived 
likelihood of strict enforcement of these sanctions, placing downward pressure on 
prices. This downward pressure has been amplified by a supply surplus that has 
been building in the oil market for several months. Regarding gas prices, although a 
recent cold spell in western Europe temporarily lifted consumption and weighed on 
inventories, prices ultimately fell by 15% due to perceptions of some progress 
towards a potential Ukraine peace deal. Given Europe’s continued efforts to end its 
reliance on Russian fossil fuels, this downward pressure is unlikely to stem from 
expectations of renewed Russian pipeline flows. Instead, it more likely reflects the 
possibility that a peace deal could lead to the removal of US sanctions affecting parts 
of Russia’s liquefied natural gas export capacity. Metal prices rose by 2%, supported 
by renewed expectations of US tariffs on copper, which prompted traders to 
accelerate shipments to the United States. By contrast, food prices fell by 3% amid 
signs of a strong cocoa supply.

Economic activity in the United States has been adversely affected by the 
federal government shutdown. The shutdown lasted 43 days and delayed key 
data releases. It is expected to negatively affect growth also in the fourth quarter of 
2025, whereas a large part of this effect is projected to be recouped in the first 
quarter of 2026. Private consumption exceeded expectations this year, supported by 
wealth gains among higher-income households amid booming equity markets. 
However, it is expected to slow as the labour market cools and households rebuild 
savings from low levels. In the third quarter, private consumption growth was strong, 
though it stalled in September on a monthly basis. Private sector proxies for private 
consumption signal weak growth in October and November, in line with declining 
consumer sentiment and a soft labour market. The boom in AI-related capital 
expenditures underpins a stronger private investment outlook. Net trade is expected 
to contribute positively to real GDP growth at the turn of the year. The labour market 
remains soft despite private sector job growth exceeding expectations in September, 
as the impact of this positive surprise was tempered by downward revisions to 
private employment in the previous months. Private sector data indicate very muted 
employment growth in October and November, while high-frequency indicators 
suggest increased lay-offs and stagnant employment growth. Hourly wage growth 
continues to moderate.

Meanwhile, tariffs are having an impact on consumer price inflation in the 
United States. Tariffs on consumer goods contributed to inflationary pressures, with 
momentum in goods inflation reaching its highest level since April 2023. Tariff-
related price increases are expected to contribute to higher inflation in the fourth 
quarter. Services inflation continues to slowly follow a downward trend, mainly due to 
slowing housing cost inflation. Meanwhile, headline personal consumption 
expenditures (PCE) inflation increased slightly to 2.8% in September (by 0.1 
percentage points), whereas core PCE inflation declined to 2.8% (by 0.1 percentage 
points). The Federal Open Market Committee lowered the target range for the 
federal funds rate at its December meeting (by 25 basis points) to 3.50-3.75%.

China’s short-term outlook points to moderating growth momentum despite 
stronger than expected growth in the third quarter. Domestic demand is still

The euro area economy is proving to be resilient despite the challenging global 
environment. Real GDP increased by 0.3% in the third quarter of 2025, which was 
above the September 2025 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area. 
This followed volatile developments in the first half of the year, reflecting the effects 
of frontloading in response to higher US trade tariffs and related uncertainty, as well 
as the impact of sharp fluctuations in Irish data. Growth in the third quarter was 
driven by domestic demand and inventory accumulation on the expenditure side, 
with market services – particularly the information and communications sector – 
contributing in terms of value added, while industry and construction remained flat. 
Survey data currently signal continued moderate growth momentum in the fourth 
quarter of 2025, led by services activity. The labour market remains resilient, but 
shows signs of slowing, with notable differences across countries and sectors. The 
unemployment rate held steady at 6.4% in September and October, close to recent 
historical low levels.

Domestic demand is expected to support GDP growth in the near to medium term. 
Gains in real incomes and a resilient labour market are likely to sustain private 
consumption, and housing investment is expected to recover in the fourth quarter 
and beyond, as suggested by leading indicators. Business investment is also set to 
expand, driven by intangibles, while tangible investments are likely to remain more 
subdued in the near term. Factors such as rising demand, higher profits, reduced 
uncertainty, additional defence and infrastructure spending, as well as improved 
financing conditions, are expected to bolster investment and activity growth further in 
the medium term.

This outlook is broadly reflected in the December 2025 Eurosystem staff 
macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which foresee annual average real 
GDP growth of 1.4% in 2025, 1.2% in 2026, 1.4% in 2027 and 1.4% in 2028. 
Compared with the September 2025 projections, GDP growth has been revised up 
over the whole projection horizon.3

The labour market remained resilient in the third quarter of 2025, although 
labour demand continued to gradually soften. Employment and total hours 
worked increased by 0.2% and 0.4% respectively in the third quarter of 2025 (Chart 
5). The ongoing moderation in employment growth partly reflects a softening in 
labour demand, with the job vacancy rate declining to 2.2% in the third quarter, 
falling below the pre-pandemic levels observed in the fourth quarter of 2019. The 
labour force remained stable in the third quarter, with October numbers indicating 
month-on-month growth of 0.1%. At the same time, the unemployment rate stood at 
6.4% in October, having stayed within a range of 6.3% to 6.4% since the beginning 
of the year.

Short-term labour market indicators point to slightly positive employment 
growth in the fourth quarter. The monthly composite PMI employment index stood 
at 50.6 in December, with a quarterly average of 50.5, suggesting broadly flat 
employment growth in the fourth quarter. PMI employment in the services sector has 
hovered at around 51 since the beginning of the year and stood at 51.3 in 
December, while the PMI employment indicator for manufacturing remained in 
negative territory, reaching 48.5 in the December release, with a quarterly average of 
48.1.

Private consumption continued to expand in the third quarter of 2025 and is 
expected to maintain its momentum in the fourth quarter. Private consumption 
expanded by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of the year, broadly in line 
with the dynamics observed in the second quarter (Chart 6, panel a). Spending on 
services continued to rise, while the consumption of goods moderated. Retail trade 
and services production increased modestly in the third quarter relative to the 
second, by 0.2 % and 0.3% respectively, quarter on quarter, while retail sales 
remained unchanged in October, in month-on-month terms. Survey evidence 
suggests robust momentum in private consumption heading into the year-end, with 
the European Commission’s consumer confidence indicator holding steady in 
November. Business expectations for demand in retail trade and consumer services 
over the next three months improved in November, with demand for consumer 
services nearing pre-pandemic levels. Across contact-intensive services, the 
European Commission’s indicators of expected demand weakened for 
accommodation services and, to a lesser extent, for food and beverage services, 
while strengthening for travel services. Along these lines, evidence from the 
Consumer Expectations Survey indicates that expectations for holiday-related 
purchases remain strong. Looking ahead, private consumption is expected to 
continue to expand, supported by the gains in real incomes from previous years. 
Although private consumption has lagged behind income growth so far, these gains

in real incomes are expected to gradually translate into stronger consumption 
momentum in the near term, despite the elevated saving rate (Chart 6, panel b). At 
the same time, according to the Consumer Expectations Survey, precautionary 
motives and Ricardian effects are influencing households’ propensity to save (see 
Box 4).

Business investment grew robustly in the third quarter and is set to increase 
further. In the third quarter of 2025 business investment rose by 1.8%, quarter on

quarter, and by 1.1% when excluding volatile Irish intangibles. Excluding Irish 
intangibles, both tangible and intangible investment showed robust growth. 
Indicators for the capital goods sector in the fourth quarter, such as the PMI output 
indicator and the European Commission’s confidence survey up to November, point 
to some weakness in tangible investment (Chart 7, panel a). Meanwhile, surveys on 
intangible services up to November, such as PMI activity and the European 
Commission’s survey on expected demand over the next three months, indicate an 
ongoing rise in intangible investment. In the November Non-Financial Business 
Sector Dialogue (NFBD), firms reported increasing investment in e-commerce, data 
centres, software development and automation. Yet the NFBD revealed that high 
energy, labour and regulatory costs, as well as fears of overregulation of AI, remain 
substantial obstacles. Looking ahead, investment should be underpinned by rising 
overall demand, higher profits, declining uncertainty and additional defence and 
infrastructure initiatives, as well as the more supportive financing conditions over the 
past year. The simplification of EU regulations could also help accelerate investment. 
Nevertheless, some significant downside risks persist, as adverse effects from 
higher tariffs may still unfold. Firms participating in the NFBD were particularly 
concerned about China’s rerouting of low-price high-tech exports – given its 
overcapacity and reduced export opportunities to the United States – which may 
erode margins and lead to market share losses in Europe.

Housing investment declined slightly in the third quarter of 2025 but is 
expected to return to moderate growth in the fourth quarter. Following two 
consecutive quarters of expansion earlier in the year, housing investment fell by 
0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter, indicating that a sustained recovery 
has not yet taken hold (Chart 7, panel b). Production in building construction and 
specialised construction activities was, on average, 0.1% higher in the third quarter 
than in the preceding quarter. Forward-looking indicators present a mixed picture. 
The European Commission’s indicator of recent trends in building and specialised

construction activity strengthened in October and November compared with the third 
quarter, whereas the PMI housing output index declined. Overall, however, housing 
investment is likely to resume a gradual recovery. This assessment is supported by a 
continued, albeit modest, increase in residential building permits in the third quarter, 
as well as by the ongoing rise in new housing loans. In addition, the Consumer 
Expectations Survey signals a growing attractiveness of housing as an investment, 
pointing to strengthening housing demand (see Box 5).

Euro area total exports picked up in the third quarter of 2025, rising by 0.7%, 
even though the underlying momentum remains weak. Euro area exports of 
goods increased markedly in the third quarter of 2025, rising by 1.5% quarter on 
quarter. This pick-up is partly attributable to higher pharmaceutical sales to the 
United States, which may have reflected a frontloading of exports by firms in 
anticipation of possible higher tariffs on those products. It also reflected increased 
exports of ingredients for weight loss drugs. Beyond pharmaceuticals, the euro area 
continues to suffer market share losses in many destinations and sectors amid 
stronger competition from China. This pattern is likely to persistently weigh on euro 
area exports. In the third quarter of 2025 imports of goods saw a moderate increase 
of 0.7%, with Chinese imports continuing to grow amid intensifying competition for 
euro area firms. At the same time, import prices continued to decline, falling by 2% in 
August in annual terms, reflecting the impact of the past appreciation of the euro and 
downward price pressures from China. Looking ahead, survey indicators continue to 
signal weakness in both manufacturing and services exports.

Compared with the September 2025 projections, real GDP growth has been 
revised up by 0.2 percentage points for 2025 and 2026 and by 0.1 percentage 
points for 2027. The upward adjustment for 2025 reflects revisions to past data, 
including the better than expected outturn for the third quarter of 2025. The 
somewhat lower trade policy uncertainty, stronger foreign demand and lower energy 
commodity prices have led to the upward revision to the growth outlook for 2026. 
Marginally stronger quarterly dynamics and a larger carry-over effect from the 
stronger growth momentum in 2026 together entail a small upward revision to the 
outlook for 2027. In terms of expenditure components, the largest upward revisions 
for 2025-27 relate to investment and, in particular, stronger business investment over 
the whole horizon and more dynamic government investment in 2027, as well as 
stronger government consumption in 2025-26. Net trade has also been revised up 
for 2025, reflecting the better than expected performance of exports in the first three 
quarters of the year.

Annual euro area headline inflation, as measured by the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP), continues to stand close to the Governing Council’s 2% 
medium-term target. It remained at 2.1% in November 20254, as an increase in 
energy inflation was offset by a decline in food inflation. HICP excluding energy and 
food (HICPX) inflation was steady at 2.4%, as goods inflation and services inflation 
moved in opposite directions. Indicators of underlying inflation have changed little in 
recent months and remain consistent with the 2% target. While growth in unit profits 
was unchanged in the third quarter of 2025, unit labour costs grew at a slightly 
higher rate than in the second quarter. The year-on-year growth in compensation per 
employee was unchanged at 4.0% in the third quarter. Most measures of longer-term 
inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2%, supporting the stabilisation of 
inflation around the target.

The December 2025 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area 
foresee headline inflation decreasing from 2.1% in 2025 to 1.9% in 2026 and then to 
1.8% in 2027, before returning to the Governing Council’s medium-term target of 2% 
in 2028. Compared with the September 2025 projections, headline inflation has been 
revised up for 2026 and revised down slightly for 2027.5

Euro area HICP inflation remained at 2.1% in November 2025 (Chart 8). This 
result follows a modest pick-up in services inflation and an increase in the energy 
component, which were offset by lower non-energy industrial goods (NEIG) inflation 
and food inflation. The annual rate of change in energy prices rose to -0.5% in 
November, up from -0.9% in October, driven by an increase in the transportation 
fuels component, which outweighed the declines in the electricity and gas 
components. Total food inflation edged down to 2.4% in November, from 2.5% in 
October. Looking at the individual food sub-components, the annual rate of change 
in processed food prices decreased slightly to 2.2% in November, from 2.3% in 
October, while that in unprocessed food prices was unchanged at 3.2%. HICPX 
inflation was stable for the third month in a row in November, standing at 2.4%. This 
reflects a modest decline in NEIG inflation to 0.5%, from 0.6% in October, which 
offset an equally sized increase in services inflation, up to 3.5% from 3.4% over the 
same period. Services inflation has been on an upward path in recent months, driven 
by higher annual rates of growth in the recreation sub-component – particularly for 
accommodation and package holidays – as well as in the transport and 
communication sub-components. Looking ahead, although services price pressures 
remain strong, the expected gradual easing of wage growth should contribute to 
services disinflation.

Indicators of underlying inflation have changed little over recent months and 
remain consistent with the ECB’s 2% medium-term target (Chart 9). In 
November 2025, most measures of underlying inflation moved sideways and the 
range of indicator values was between 2.0% and 2.5%.6 All permanent exclusion-
based measures of inflation were unchanged from October, remaining between 2.4% 
and 2.5%. Movements in most temporary exclusion-based measures also pointed to 
a stabilisation of underlying inflation pressures in November. Domestic inflation, 
which includes mostly services items, increased slightly to 3.6% in November, from 
3.5% in October. As for the model-based measures, the Persistent and Common 
Component of Inflation decreased to 2.0% in November, while the Supercore 
indicator, which comprises HICP items sensitive to the business cycle, held steady at 
2.5% for the fifth consecutive month.

Measures of pipeline pressures indicate a gradual easing of inflation 
pressures (Chart 10). At the early stages of the pricing chain, producer price 
inflation for energy fell significantly, down to -3.9% in October 2025 from -2.4% in 
September, well below its peak of 7.8% in February. Over the same period, for 
intermediate goods, the annual growth rate of domestic producer prices increased to 
0.1%, up from -0.1%, while that of import prices remained unchanged at -0.8%. At 
the later stages of the pricing chain, for non-food consumer goods, domestic 
producer price inflation remained unchanged at 1.5% in October, while import price 
inflation declined to -1.6% from -1.2% in September. At the same time, for 
manufactured food, the annual growth rate of producer prices decreased to 1.1%, 
down from 1.7%, while that of import prices continued to fall from its peak of 10.6% 
in January, dropping to 2.8% in October from 4.9% in September. Overall, the data 
suggest that pipeline pressures for both consumer goods and food have been 
easing, reflecting the appreciation of the euro and, possibly, China’s increased focus 
on the euro area as an export market, putting downward pressure on import prices.

Domestic cost pressures, as measured by growth in the GDP deflator, 
remained broadly stable at 2.4% in the third quarter of 2025 (Chart 11). This 
reflected an uptick in the contribution from unit labour costs, which was offset by a 
stable contribution from unit profits and a decrease in that from unit net taxes. The 
slight increase in the yearly growth rate of unit labour costs was due to a moderate 
decline in the growth rate for labour productivity, down to 0.7% in the third quarter 
from 0.8% in the second quarter, and a stable growth rate for compensation per 
employee, which stood at 4.0% in the third quarter. The latter mirrored a decline in 
negotiated wage growth, down to 1.9% in the third quarter from 4.0% in the previous 
quarter, which was offset by a substantial increase in the wage drift component over 
the same period. The sharp drop in negotiated wage growth reflects the mechanical 
impact of large one-off payments made in 2024, which, at the same time, was also 
causing the volatility in the wage drift. Looking ahead, the ECB’s wage tracker, which 
incorporates data on wage agreements negotiated up to the end of November 2025, 
continues to indicate that wage growth pressures will remain moderate in both the 
fourth quarter of 2025 and first half of 2026, before stabilising gradually in the second 
half of 2026.7 The December 2025 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for 
the euro area expect growth in compensation per employee to stand at 4.0%, on 
average, for 2025 and to moderate to 3.2% in 2026, 2.9% in 2027 and 3.0% in 2028.

During the review period from 11 September to 17 December 2025, market-
based measures of inflation compensation (Chart 12, panel a) were largely 
unchanged, as were longer-term inflation expectations among professional 
forecasters and monetary analysts. The one-year forward inflation-linked swap 
rate one year ahead, a market-based measure of short-term inflation compensation, 
remained broadly stable at around 1.8%. Inflation-linked markets appeared not to 
react strongly to the European Council’s decision on 5 November 2025 to postpone 
the implementation of the EU Emissions Trading System 2 (ETS2) by one year, from 
2027 to 2028. At medium and longer-term maturities, inflation compensation was 
similarly stable. The five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead, 
adjusted for inflation risk premia, remained close to 2%. This suggests that longer-
term market-based expectations remain well anchored to the Governing Council’s 
inflation target. In both the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters for the fourth 
quarter of 2025 and the ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts for December 2025, 
average and median longer-term inflation expectations remained at 2%.

The December 2025 projections expect headline inflation to average 2.1% in 
2025, 1.9% in 2026 and 1.8% in 2027, before returning to the Governing 
Council’s medium-term target of 2% in 2028 (Chart 13). Headline inflation is 
expected to remain at 2.1% in the last quarter of 2025, before falling somewhat 
below 2.0% in 2026 and remaining at those lower levels in 2027. The lower average 
rate projected for 2026 is related to energy base effects in the first quarter, weaker 
food inflation, and a decline in HICPX inflation owing to a moderation in services 
inflation. The further decrease in headline inflation in 2027 reflects a continued 
decline in HICPX inflation, which is partly offset by a reversion of energy inflation to 
zero rates, while food inflation should remain unchanged. Headline inflation is then

expected to rise in 2028, driven mainly by a significant increase in energy inflation 
owing to climate transition-related fiscal measures and, in particular, the introduction 
of the ETS2 scheme. Compared with the September 2025 projections, the outlook 
for headline inflation remains unchanged for 2025, whereas it has been revised 
upwards by 0.2 percentage points for 2026 and revised downwards by 0.1 
percentage points for 2027. The upward revision for 2026 mainly reflects a stronger 
services inflation outlook, while the downward revision for 2027 is primarily due to 
the expected postponement of ETS2, partly offset by stronger services inflation. 
HICPX inflation is projected to decline from 2.4% in 2025 to 2.2% in 2026 and then 
to stabilise at or close to 2% towards the end of the projection horizon, driven by 
fading labour cost pressures on services inflation. Compared with the September 
2025 projections, HICPX inflation is unchanged for 2025, while it has been revised 
upwards by 0.3 percentage points for 2026 and 0.1 percentage points for 2027.

Euro area short and long-term risk-free rates increased during the review period from 
11 September to 17 December 2025, with markets effectively pricing out further 
interest rate cuts. Long-term sovereign bond yields ended the review period higher 
but spreads relative to risk-free rates narrowed. The increase in risk-free rates and 
sovereign yields was in line with a broader trend that saw yield curves steepen 
globally, largely on the back of a rise in real rates. Euro area equity markets 
recorded gains over the review period, notwithstanding temporary setbacks amid 
concerns about the valuations of artificial intelligence (AI) companies in the United 
States. Spreads in corporate bond markets narrowed further and currently stand at 
record lows, sustained by elevated risk appetite. In foreign exchange markets, the 
euro remained stable both against the US dollar (+0.3%) and in trade-weighted 
terms (+0.4%). The stability against the US dollar reflected better than expected 
macroeconomic developments in both the euro area and the United States, while the 
trade-weighted stability was due to offsetting exchange rate movements against 
trading partners.

Short and long-term risk-free rates in the euro area went up during the review 
period (Chart 14). The benchmark euro short-term rate (€STR) stood at 1.93% at 
the end of the review period, following the Governing Council’s decisions to keep the 
three key ECB interest rates unchanged at its September and October meetings. 
Excess liquidity decreased by around €164 billion to €2,486 billion, mainly reflecting 
the continuing decline in the portfolios of securities held for monetary policy 
purposes. Very near-term forward rates rose over the review period, as markets 
priced out expectations of further interest rate cuts. The resurfacing of global trade 
uncertainty, which was mainly due to heightened tensions between the United States 
and China, prompted a brief decline in risk-free rates during October. This decrease 
was subsequently reversed amid improving trade sentiment, as the United States 
signed trade agreements with a number of Asian countries and geopolitical tensions 
in the Middle East declined. Following the Governing Council meeting on 30 October 
2025, near-term policy rate expectations drifted higher as incoming data releases 
signalled that the euro area economy remained resilient. By the end of the review 
period, the €STR forward curve was pricing in cumulative interest rate hikes of 6 
basis points by the end of 2026, a reversal from the cumulative interest rate cuts of 8 
basis points that were priced in at the start of the review period. Looking beyond 
2027, the €STR forward curve shifted upwards across all maturities, in line with a 
global steepening in yield curves driven mainly by higher real rates. Overall, the ten-
year nominal overnight index swap (OIS) rate increased to 2.7% over the review 
period.

Long-term sovereign bond yields ended the review period higher, while 
spreads relative to risk-free rates narrowed (Charts 15 and 16). The ten-year 
GDP-weighted euro area sovereign bond yield rose by 14 basis points over the 
review period, to stand at around 3.2%. Sovereign spreads relative to risk-free OIS 
rates narrowed, reflecting strong risk appetite across asset classes and a favourable 
market reassessment of the fiscal outlook for some countries, such as Spain and 
Italy. French sovereign yields performed similarly to those of other euro area 
countries, as political uncertainty in France waned. Meanwhile, a downgrade in 
France’s sovereign credit rating prompted only a short-lived reaction in financial 
markets. Cross-country dispersion in sovereign spreads over risk-free rates declined 
throughout the review period, reaching historically low levels.

Euro area equity market indices moved higher over the review period, in spite 
of temporary setbacks reflecting concerns about AI‑related valuations (Chart 
17). Euro area stock market indices gained 4.9% over the review period, with the 
sub-index for non-financial corporations (NFCs) rising by 4% and bank stock prices 
increasing by 10.6%. Euro area financial equities gained on account of a sustained

increase in equity market valuations, underpinned by robust balance sheets and 
elevated profitability. US stock market indices strengthened by around 1.3%, with 
increases of 1.5% for NFCs and 6.8% for banks. The broader index for US financial 
firms went up by 1.1%. Despite the overall gains in both the euro area and the 
United States, investor unease about the valuations of US AI equities triggered a 
period of sell-off in November. However, subsequent strong earnings reports from 
some of the major AI-related firms helped to alleviate these concerns. Overall, euro 
area equities outperformed their US peers, owing partly to market reservations about 
stretched valuations, declining cash levels and growing financial interdependencies 
between AI companies in the United States.

In corporate bond markets, spreads on investment-grade and high-yield bonds 
narrowed further and are currently at record lows. Risk appetite remained high 
over the review period and supported favourable financing conditions in corporate 
bond markets, with spreads in the investment-grade and high-yield segments 
tightening by approximately 2 and 15 basis points respectively. Investment-grade 
spreads narrowed by 4 basis points for NFCs and remained broadly unchanged for 
financial firms. In the high-yield segment, spreads tightened by 19 basis points for 
NFCs and widened by around 35 basis points for financial corporations.

In foreign exchange markets, the euro was stable both against the US dollar 
and in trade-weighted terms (Chart 18). During the review period, the nominal 
effective exchange rate of the euro – as measured against the currencies of 41 of 
the euro area’s most important trading partners – was stable (+0.4%). This stability 
reflected offsetting changes against different trading partners. Notably, the euro 
appreciated against the Japanese yen (+5.5%) and pound sterling (+1.6%), which 
reflected uncertainties surrounding the fiscal and monetary policy outlook in Japan 
and the United Kingdom. The upward pressure on the euro was compensated by a

depreciation against the Chinese renminbi (-0.8%) and Polish zloty (-1.3%). The 
euro remained stable against the US dollar (+0.3%) and hovered near its historical 
average of 1.18 during the review period, as the significant strengthening seen 
earlier this year levelled off. This stability reflected better than anticipated 
macroeconomic developments in both the euro area and United States, along with 
broadly unchanged relative monetary policy expectations.

Bank lending rates for firms have been broadly stable since the summer, after falling 
in response to the ECB’s past interest rate cuts. In October average interest rates on 
new loans to firms and on new mortgages remained at 3.5% and 3.3% respectively. 
Growth in loans to firms and households increased further but stayed moderate 
overall. Over the review period from 11 September to 17 December 2025, the cost of 
both market-based debt and equity financing rose, driven by higher risk-free rates. 
The annual growth rate of broad money (M3) was unchanged at 2.8% in October.

Bank lending rates for firms and households have stabilised since September, 
against the backdrop of unchanged policy rates and limited moves in longer-
term rates. The cost of bank borrowing for non-financial corporations (NFCs) 
remained unchanged at 3.5% in October 2025, around 1.8 percentage points down 
from its October 2023 peak, with minor variations across the larger euro area

21).8 This stability reflected a higher cost of equity financing that was broadly offset 
by a decline in the cost of market-based debt observed in October relative to the 
previous month. Meanwhile, the cost of bank borrowing remained almost 
unchanged. Daily data for the entire review period from 11 September to 17 
December 2025 show upward movements in both the cost of market-based debt 
and, to a lesser extent, the cost of equity financing. The increase in the cost of 
market-based debt was driven by the upward shift in risk-free rates while corporate 
bond spreads declined marginally. Similarly, the rise in the risk-free rate, as 
approximated by the ten-year overnight index swap rate, led to the increase in the 
cost of equity, despite a slight decline in the equity risk premium.

purchase and consumer credit growth both supported this upward trend. Other forms 
of lending to households, including loans to sole proprietors, remained weak. 
According to the ECB’s most recent Consumer Expectations Survey, households 
perceived credit access to be slightly harder in October, although they expected it to 
remain stable over the next 12 months. The still relatively slow pace of growth in 
loans partly reflects higher levels of uncertainty about global economic policies. This 
factor was particularly prevalent in the first half of 2025, stemming, among other 
things, from trade policy developments in the United States.9

Annual growth in broad money (M3) stabilised in October, supported by stable 
dynamics in household and firm loans and deposits (Chart 23). The progressive 
decline in M3 growth seen since February 2025 halted in October as annual M3 
growth was unchanged at 2.8%. This is well below the 4% rate reached in the first 
part of 2025 and its long-term average of 6.1%. Annual growth in narrow money 
(M1), which comprises the most liquid components of M3, increased at a relatively 
stable rate, to 5.2% in October from 5.0% in September. M1 growth continued to be 
driven by overnight deposits, reflecting a strong preference for liquid assets among

firms and households. From a counterpart perspective, loans to households and 
firms continued to make a moderate contribution to money creation. Net foreign 
monetary inflows appear to have lost strength and have become more volatile 
compared with 2024. Banks’ purchases of government bonds were sustaining 
money growth in an environment of robust bond supply. This was amid the ongoing 
contraction of the Eurosystem balance sheet with a passive runoff of the asset 
purchase programme and pandemic emergency purchase programme portfolio 
which continued to weigh on M3 growth.

According to the December 2025 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the 
euro area general government budget deficit is expected to decline from 3.1% of 
GDP in 2024 to 3.0% of GDP in 2025 and then increase to 3.5% of GDP in 2027 
before moderating to 3.4% of GDP in 2028. Broadly reflecting this path, the euro 
area fiscal stance is projected to tighten slightly in 2025, loosen in 2026 and then 
tighten again in 2027 and 2028. However, the fiscal policy assumptions and 
projections continue to be surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty.10 The 
European Commission has adopted the 2026 Autumn Package and expects the 
majority of Member States to be compliant with their commitments or to be at limited 
risk of being non-compliant, taking into account the activation of the national escape 
clause. At the same time, it is welcome that nationally financed investments are 
expanding in the euro area as a whole. Governments should prioritise sustainable 
public finances, strategic investment and growth-enhancing structural reforms.

According to the December 2025 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections, the euro area general government budget balance is set to 
improve gradually over the projection horizon (Chart 24).11 After a slight decline 
expected in 2025, the euro area budget deficit is projected to increase rather strongly 
to 3.5% of GDP in 2027 and to moderate only slightly to 3.4% of GDP in 2028. This 
increase reflects rising interest payments (from 1.9% of GDP in 2024 to 2.3% in 
2028), which are only marginally offset by the impact of the economic cycle. Hence, 
the cyclical component remains broadly neutral over the projection horizon, turning 
slightly positive in 2028, and the cyclically adjusted primary balance remains broadly 
unchanged (when accounting for Next Generation EU (NGEU) grants). Compared 
with the September 2025 ECB staff projections, the projected budget balance path 
has been revised down slightly over 2025-27, mainly on account of the cyclically 
adjusted primary balance, which more than offsets the slight improvement in the 
cyclical component.

After a slight tightening in 2025, the euro area fiscal stance is projected to 
loosen in 2026 and tighten again in 2027 and 2028.12 The annual change in the 
cyclically adjusted primary balance, adjusted for grants extended to countries under 
the NGEU programme, points to a modest tightening over the coming years, except 
in 2026. The tightening in 2025 is mostly due to discretionary revenue measures, 
including increases in social security contributions and, to a lesser extent, increases 
in direct and indirect taxes. These increases were partly offset by continued growth 
in public spending. In 2026 the fiscal stance is projected to loosen, mainly on 
account of higher public investment. In 2027 consolidation in many countries 
(following, among other factors, the expiry of NGEU financing) is offset by stimulus, 
particularly in Germany. In addition, deferred NGEU-funded spending, mainly in 
Spain and Italy, mitigates the fiscal stance tightening in 2027. In 2028 the euro area 
fiscal stance is expected to continue tightening, albeit at a somewhat slower pace 
than in 2027. However, the modest tightening masks country heterogeneity, as a 
strongly loosening fiscal stance in Germany compensates for significant tightening in 
France, Spain and Italy. The tightening in Spain and Italy largely stems from a lower 
level of spending, mainly on capital transfers and investment previously financed 
from NGEU funding.

The euro area debt-to-GDP ratio is set on a rising path (Chart 25). The euro area 
debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase from 86.6% in 2024 to 89.2% in 2028 as 
primary deficits and positive deficit-debt adjustments outweigh the favourable,

though diminishing, effects of interest rate-growth differentials. Compared with the 
September 2025 projections, the government debt path has been revised down. The 
downward revision reflects base effects from statistical revisions in 2024 and more 
favourable interest rate-growth differentials.

On 25 November the European Commission adopted its 2026 Autumn 
Package, setting out economic and employment policy priorities. This package 
contains the Commission’s assessment of EU Member States’ compliance with the 
EU fiscal framework and provides guidance for their fiscal policies in 2026. It also 
includes the Commission’s assessment of euro area countries’ draft budgetary plans 
(DBPs) for 2026. However, not all euro area countries had submitted their budgetary 
plans to the Commission, mainly owing to their electoral cycles.13 It is encouraging 
that, based on the Commission analysis, a majority of Member States are expected 
to be compliant with their commitments or at limited risk of being non-compliant, 
taking into account the activation of the national escape clause. It is also welcome 
that nationally financed investments are expanding in the euro area as a whole. 
Governments should prioritise sustainable public finances, strategic investment and 
growth-enhancing structural reforms.

On 1 January 2026 Bulgaria adopted the euro and became the 21st member of 
the euro area. The assessments set out in the latest convergence reports of the 
European Commission (2025) and the European Central Bank (ECB, 2025) paved 
the way for Bulgaria to adopt the euro and thereby further enlargement of the euro 
area following Croatia joining in 2023.1 On 8 July 2025 the Council of the European 
Union formally approved the accession of Bulgaria to the euro area and determined 
a Bulgarian lev conversion rate of 1.95583 levs per euro. This rate had been the 
central rate of the lev during the country’s participation in the exchange rate 
mechanism (ERM II).2 Bulgaria’s adoption of the euro demonstrates that euro area 
membership remains an attractive prospect in times of high uncertainty and 
geopolitical tensions.

Bulgaria is well integrated with the euro area through trade and financial 
linkages. The country has a population of about 6.5 million and its GDP accounts for 
around 0.7% of euro area GDP. Its economic structure is broadly similar to that of 
the euro area as a whole, with industry (including construction) and services 
contributing around 29% and 68% respectively to gross value added, compared with 
around 26% and 72% in the euro area. The euro area is Bulgaria’s main trading and 
financial partner (Chart A, panel a). Prior to adopting the euro, its economy showed a 
relatively high degree of euroisation. Around 70% of government debt, along with a 
significant share of the debt of non-financial corporations, was already denominated 
in euro, mirroring the currency composition of both household savings and firms’ 
liquid assets, which are largely held in the form of deposits (Chart A, panel b). For 
over 25 years Bulgaria’s monetary policy was aligned with that of the ECB through 
its currency board, which maintained a fixed BGN/EUR exchange rate. Bulgaria’s 
deep integration with the euro area is reflected in the strong alignment of its business 
cycle with that of the euro area in the 15 years before euro adoption. Furthermore, 
banks owned by financial institutions domiciled in other euro area countries play a 
dominant role in the Bulgarian banking system.

As with other countries that have adopted the euro, Bulgaria is expected to 
benefit from lower transaction and borrowing costs. Given Bulgaria’s deep 
integration with the euro area and its commitment to maintaining sound fiscal, 
structural and financial policies, adopting the euro is expected to bring with it a 
number of economic advantages. These include: (i) increased foreign trade and 
investment driven by lower transaction costs; (ii) enhanced price transparency and 
comparability; and (iii) greater investor confidence.3 The economy is also expected 
to gain from lower borrowing costs due to well-anchored inflation expectations and 
reduced regulatory costs for banks, such as lower reserve requirements.

The costs and risks of adopting the euro are expected to be minor and largely 
one-off. When it comes to a country joining the euro area, the main sources of 
concern are the costs of the changeover and the potential for unjustified price 
increases when prices are converted to euro.4 To allay these concerns, the 
Bulgarian authorities have implemented several measures, including enhanced price 
monitoring and inspections to address abusive practices, as well as a long 
mandatory period for the dual display of prices, which began on 8 August 2025 and 
will end on 8 August 2026. Nevertheless, public support for the euro in Bulgaria 
remains relatively low amid fears of price hikes. This was also the case for previous 
euro changeovers, with support then typically rising thereafter (Chart B).5 
Considering Bulgaria’s high level of economic and financial integration with the euro 
area and its long-standing fixed BGN/EUR exchange rate, the loss of exchange rate 
flexibility as a stabilisation tool is practically inconsequential.

Since joining the EU in 2007, Bulgaria has made significant progress in 
converging towards the euro area. The excessive macroeconomic imbalances in 
existence before the COVID-19 pandemic – such as a negative external position, 
fragilities in the financial sector and high corporate indebtedness – have gradually 
been corrected with credible policy actions and prudent fiscal policies. Bulgaria has 
also made notable progress in terms of convergence in real terms: GDP per capita

rose from around 35% of the euro area average in 2006 to just above 60% in 2025 
(Chart C, panel a). Furthermore, it has achieved greater financial integration, with the 
close cooperation framework (established in 2020) helping to both align supervisory 
standards with those of the euro area and strengthen financial stability.

While Bulgaria’s economy has weathered recent shocks relatively well, risks to 
inflation convergence remain. The Bulgarian economy proved resilient throughout 
the pandemic and in the face of recent energy price spikes and geopolitical tensions. 
Nevertheless, its small and open nature means that it remains exposed to external 
shocks.6 Inflation remains vulnerable to external price fluctuations owing to the high 
energy intensity of production and the large share of energy and food in household 
consumption.7 Strong wage and credit dynamics – though moderating – pose 
additional upside risks. Over the long term, Bulgaria’s relatively low income and price 
levels, when compared with other countries that have adopted the euro (Chart C, 
panel b), suggest that real and nominal convergence will likely continue.

Bulgaria has maintained a sound fiscal record, but may face pressure to raise 
its relatively low levels of public expenditure. Under the currency board, the 
country recorded fiscal surpluses in 13 of the past 27 years, kept its debt ratio well 
below 60% of GDP (23.8% in 2024, the second lowest in the EU) and, from 2012, 
avoided being subject to an excessive deficit procedure. This strong fiscal 
performance was supported by prudent fiscal policy, which was required to sustain 
the credibility of the currency board. As Bulgaria adopts the euro and the constraints 
of the currency board fade, fiscal policy incentives may change. Should the 
perception emerge that fiscal discipline could become less strict, this could, over

time, generate spending pressure, particularly for those economic functions for which 
the share of spending is currently relatively low. Notably, this is the case with public 
investment, which has remained persistently low compared with other CEE countries 
(Chart D, panel a), partly owing to the slower than initially planned deployment of 
Next Generation EU funds. Spending on social protection, health and education is 
also subdued compared with that in the euro area (Chart D, panel b). Should 
pressure to raise such government outlays transpose into increased expenditure, 
keeping the debt ratio stable would require higher tax revenues. Going forward, 
maintaining sound and growth-friendly public finances in line with the EU economic 
governance rules and supported by a strong national fiscal framework, together with 
continued structural reforms to bolster productivity, would be the best approach to 
achieving sustainable long-term economic convergence and avoiding undue 
inflationary pressures and losses of competitiveness that could hamper Bulgaria’s 
long-term economic growth potential.

Trade policy uncertainty has risen significantly in the face of higher tariffs and 
tariff threats, adding a new layer of complexity to assessing the global 
economic outlook. Shifts in tariff and trade policy, unpredictable communication 
and the move away from rules-based multilateralism towards bilateral leverage have 
heightened uncertainty for firms and investors. This has influenced sourcing, 
production and investment decisions, and may weigh on trade dynamics, investment 
and overall macroeconomic performance. Moreover, uncertainty can affect 
expectations and dampen activity even in the absence of concrete policy changes. 
Monitoring it has therefore become crucial to assessing the economic outlook. Trade 
policy uncertainty has been an important part of the technical assumptions 
underlying recent rounds of the Eurosystem/ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area.1

However, trade policy uncertainty is unobservable and difficult to model. To 
capture it, indicators such as the trade policy uncertainty (TPU) index set out in 
Caldara et al. (2020) count press articles in which trade-related and uncertainty-
related keywords appear in close proximity. This index, shown in Chart A for 1990-
2025, remained subdued during 1990-2016 before rising during the first Trump 
election campaign and presidency as well as the first US-China trade conflict, in 
2018-20. In April 2025 it reached a historical high when the second Trump 
Administration imposed a 10% baseline tariff on most imports and additional country-
specific tariffs of up to 50%. Although the TPU index has since eased, it remains 
elevated by historical standards.

As regards gauging the macroeconomic effects of trade policy uncertainty, for 
the last couple of quarters standard linear models often imply implausibly 
large effects. One reason for this is that these models extrapolate from historical 
relations that may no longer hold. Another reason relates to the construction of the 
TPU index itself: the April spike implies that a very large proportion (around 10%) of 
all press articles in the underlying text data corpus mention trade policy uncertainty-
related keywords, which suggests the index may have been inflated by heightened 
media attention or trade policy keywords being mentioned in the context of other 
topics.

The contamination of text-based TPU indicators is likely related to media 
coverage of trade policy coinciding with broader economic or political 
reporting. One concern is that policy actions have heightened uncertainty not only in 
trade but also in other policy areas. As a result, measured trade policy uncertainty 
may overlap with other forms of uncertainty. For instance, an article published by 
Reuters in June (Saphir, 2025) mentions trade policy, but primarily in the context of 
geopolitical risk: “with the U.S. economy already expected to slow under pressure 
from the Trump administration’s high import tariffs, a rise in oil prices resulting from 
the conflict [the strike on Iran] ‘could provide powerful downward pressure on 
households’ ability to spend...”. Such reporting also highlights another borderline 
case: articles discussing the economic uncertainty regarding the effects of tariffs 
rather than uncertainty about trade policy itself, as in “and while it is also expected to 
show inflation running near the Fed’s 2% goal last month, many Fed officials expect 
tariffs to feed into higher prices…” in the same article. Consequently, media reports 
may inflate counts of TPU-related keywords when the index is interpreted in a strictly 
economic sense. Against this background, this box cautions against mechanically 
interpreting TPU indicator readings as pure uncertainty shocks and proposes an 
alternative measure for use in standard macroeconomic models.

The standard TPU measure can be refined by eliminating contaminating 
influences. These influences become problematic when econometric analysis is 
seeking to disentangle distinct uncertainty channels, for instance in scenario 
analysis, and may lead to double-counting if readings from the raw TPU measure are 
treated as a primitive trade policy uncertainty shock. This box therefore proposes an 
alternative TPU measure, which uses the raw index cleaned for cases of keyword-
driven co-mentions, such as those cited in the previous paragraph. Rather than 
being constructed from the ground up, the unadjusted series is cleaned indirectly by 
regressing it on a set of proxies, a constant and a COVID-19 pandemic dummy. This 
removes variation explained by historical co-movements of uncertainty-related 
keywords while preserving changes that extend beyond them. The first set of proxies 
controls for instances where broad uncertainty coverage inflates TPU counts, and

The adjusted TPU index allows counterfactual scenarios to be constructed that 
yield more plausible estimates of macroeconomic impacts. On the basis of the 
adjusted index, alternative paths for the degree of trade policy uncertainty can be 
defined and updated as new data become available, providing a flexible input for 
conditional forecasting and projection exercises. Chart C, panel a) illustrates two 
scenarios: one in which TPU declines from current levels to the average observed 
during the first trade conflict, and another that assumes a more protracted decline. 
Chart C, panel b) shows the corresponding effects on US GDP and on global GDP 
(excluding the US), taking into account TPU-implied shocks since the beginning of 
the year. Under these assumptions, GDP in the United States and the rest of the 
world would contract by about 0.1 percentage points by the end of 2027 if 
uncertainty fell back to first trade conflict levels, but by roughly 0.2 percentage points 
if uncertainty remained elevated for longer.

In conclusion, adjusting TPU measures can improve their indicator properties 
and make them easier to interpret. This box argues that text-based measures of 
trade policy uncertainty might capture a broader concept of uncertainty than 
uncertainty surrounding trade policy announcements and implementation alone. 
Once confounding influences and media cycle effects are removed, adjusted 
measures of trade policy uncertainty yield less sizeable macroeconomic impacts 
than commonly reported in the literature. In addition, if a more restrictive definition of 
trade policy uncertainty is adopted, these alternative indicators can readily be used 
to define scenarios for conditional forecasting and projection exercises. In this 
context, the adjusted TPU index was used as a starting point for analysing the

impact of trade policy uncertainty in the Eurosystem/ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, and was employed both for baseline projections and 
scenario analysis.

Recent shocks have underscored the importance of and challenges associated 
with monitoring global trade in a timely manner. The large effects of post-
COVID-19 pandemic supply bottlenecks (2021-22), disruptions in the Panama Canal 
(2023) and the Red Sea (2024-25), and recent tariff escalations have highlighted the 
need for timely trade monitoring. This box outlines how the inclusion of real-time 
indicators derived from satellite data on vessel movements in an otherwise standard 
tracker can provide timely insights into global trade dynamics. The augmented 
tracker currently indicates subdued but improving trade dynamics.

ECB staff first developed a global trade tracker in 2020 to track world import 
growth (outside the euro area) using trade-related financial indicators; 
however, its accuracy was limited.1 That initial version relied primarily on financial 
market data such as stock prices for global logistics companies. Following the 
methodology of Lewis et al. (2022), a principal components analysis was used to 
extract the underlying trend in an input dataset combining high-frequency (daily and 
weekly) data with monthly indicators.2 Despite its timeliness compared with national 
accounts data, which are not released until 30-45 days after the end of the reference 
quarter, this version of the tracker exhibited limited out-of-sample accuracy.

The satellite-based indicators match key events in global trade well. For 
example, the surge in goods trade following the pandemic was mirrored by a large 
uptick in maritime traffic (Chart A, panel a). In the second quarter of 2025, the same 
data indicated a marked slowdown in US trade amid rising trade barriers and the 
contrasting resilience of China’s trade. Likewise, the widespread post-pandemic 
supply bottlenecks were visible in the above-average congestion at major US ports

2 Monthly series help smooth out the volatility inherent in high-frequency data. Empirical tests show that 
monthly data improve in-sample correlation and out-of-sample predictive accuracy.

Satellite-based indicators exhibit a stronger correlation with global trade than 
financial indicators, making them well-suited to augment the trade tracker. 
Statistical tests (Efron et al., 2004; Fan and Lv, 2008) assessing the predictive power 
of various daily and weekly indicators relative to global imports show that satellite-
based series outperform market-based indicators (e.g. equity prices, shipping prices, 
commodity prices) and indicators from alternative data sources (e.g. Google Trends, 
flights data). For instance, some satellite-based indices (e.g. EU auto exports) have 
a Pearson correlation with global imports higher than 0.7 over the period 2016-24, 
while financial indicators have an average correlation of 0.4.

Satellite data substantially improve the forecast performance of the tracker, 
both in terms of directional accuracy (increased from 50% to 80%) and in 
terms of point accuracy (out-of-sample error cut by half). The out-of-sample 
directional forecast accuracy of the previous tracker was below 50%, meaning that it 
correctly predicted the direction of global trade growth less than half the time. By 
comparison, the revised tracker would have correctly predicted the direction in

3 Methodological refinements were applied to ensure consistency in transformations, starting points and 
principal component analysis sequencing. The regressor set was expanded with high-frequency 
adjustments following Wegmüller and Glocker (2023). Technical changes had limited impact on out-of-
sample performance.

The augmented tracker particularly outperforms the previous tracker in 
periods when financial market variables diverge from global trade dynamics. 
Global trade is generally well-correlated with financial market movements (Barhoumi 
and Ferrara, 2015), but this relationship can lead to erroneous signals when financial 
markets widely decouple from trade dynamics. This occurred in 2022, when stock 
markets fell amid surging inflation and geopolitical shocks while global trade was 
resilient due to the gradual easing of supply bottlenecks (Chart C, panel a). A similar 
situation arose in the first quarter of 2025, when financial markets retreated due to 
policy uncertainty whereas global trade was boosted by a frontloading of imports 
ahead of tariffs (Chart C, panel b). In both episodes, the previous tracker pointed to 
global trade growth well below its actual pace, which the augmented tracker 
captured more accurately.

The global trade tracker complements other trade forecasting tools, helping to 
form a top-down assessment of the short-term outlook. The tracker 
complements dynamic factor models and error-correction-based trade equations to 
serve as a starting point for trade analysis. It offers a timely pulse check by drawing 
on high-frequency data, making it more responsive to rapid shifts in trade dynamics 
than models based on monthly or quarterly data. Nevertheless, the tracker is a 
complement to rather than a substitute for other tools, as in normal times high-
frequency data, which are inherently noisy, might be of second-order importance.

Since mid-2024, households’ real disposable income and consumption have 
been growing at broadly similar rates, thereby stabilising the saving rate at a 
higher level than before the pandemic. According to a statistical decomposition, 
rising real income – particularly labour income – supported the saving rate prior to 
the pandemic, while higher real consumption exerted an offsetting effect (Chart B). 
Compared with the pre-pandemic period, income growth accelerated markedly from 
mid-2022 to mid-2024, driven mainly by stronger contributions from non-labour 
income – including self-employment income, net interest income, dividends and 
rents – and by net fiscal income related to fiscal measures introduced in response to 
the energy price shock, including untargeted support. These factors likely boosted

the saving rate, as non-labour income accrues disproportionately to higher-income 
households who have a greater propensity to save.2 Since mid-2024 the saving rate 
has remained broadly stable as real income and consumption dynamics have 
normalised, with stronger growth in labour income – reflecting real wage catch-up 
and sustained employment – offsetting declining non-labour income and the gradual 
withdrawal of fiscal support.

Empirical estimates indicate that the saving rate has remained elevated over 
the last year, as the negative contributions of declining real interest rates and 
improving real net wealth positions have not fully counterbalanced the support 
from strongly rising real labour income. An empirical model for real household 
consumption shows that, prior to the pandemic, higher real income – particularly 
labour income – raised the saving rate, as consumption did not adjust one-to-one 
with income, whereas increases in real net wealth lowered it by reducing 
households’ incentives to save and, thus, encouraging higher consumption (Chart 
C). The rise in the saving rate between mid-2022 and mid-2024 reflected the rapidly 
increasing labour income, while stronger-than-usual growth in other income (i.e. the 
sum of non-labour and fiscal income) also made a significant positive contribution.3 
Lower real net wealth following the surge in inflation and higher real interest rates 
brought about by the monetary policy tightening provided additional upward 
contributions, while the legacy of the pandemic weighed on the saving rate as

consumption normalised. Since mid-2024, real labour income growth has increased 
once more, providing a strong upward push to the saving rate. This has been offset, 
however, by rising real net wealth – whose contribution to the saving rate returned to 
its historical average – declining real interest rates and a reversal of earlier increases 
in other income.

Households’ uncertainty about their own financial situation also appears to 
play an important role in saving decisions. Household-level information from the 
Consumer Expectations Survey (CES) is used to shed light on factors not captured 
by standard macroeconomic determinants, as indicated by the positive unexplained 
component in the model-based decomposition since mid-2022 (Chart C). In 
particular, the analysis focuses on policy-related and individual uncertainty, as 
reflected in Ricardian and precautionary saving motives.4 A new question fielded in 
the November 2025 CES questionnaire reveals that precautionary and Ricardian 
motives are each relevant for around 50% of respondents in their saving decisions, 
with 25-30% also indicating one or the other as the most important reason to save

(Chart D, panel a).5 A closer look at cross-sectional differences across participants 
shows that the importance of these two motives depends mainly on the economic 
constraints faced by respondents and the degree of uncertainty about their financial 
situation, while differences across income and age seem to play a more muted role 
(Chart D, panel b). Households with no self-reported liquidity constraints are more 
likely to attach significantly higher importance to both motives, consistent with their 
stronger capacity to plan and save (“unconstrained”). At the same time, respondents 
reporting a high degree of certainty about their future financial situation (“certain”) 
attach significantly less importance to the two motives than households facing 
greater uncertainty. The similarities in the determinants of the two motives would 
suggest that they are close conceptually, with respondents tending to perceive the 
actions of the government as an additional source of income uncertainty. This is 
consistent with previous analysis that has highlighted the importance of geopolitical 
and policy uncertainty for consumer spending.6

Overall, model and survey-based evidence suggests that both conjunctural 
and behavioural factors have contributed to the saving rate remaining elevated 
but broadly stable. While income and wealth dynamics have largely returned to 
pre-pandemic patterns, heightened uncertainty and precautionary motives have 
likely continued to exert upward pressure on savings.

Housing investment is a bellwether of the economy and the ECB Consumer 
Expectations Survey (CES) offers timely insights into how households 
perceive its attractiveness. Housing investment matters at both the individual and 
the aggregate level.1 For many people it represents the most important financial 
decision in their lifetime, while at the macroeconomic level it primarily serves as a 
leading indicator of overall economic activity.2 Taken together, these two 
perspectives suggest that household perceptions contain valuable information for 
tracking fluctuations in housing investment and also, potentially, for anticipating 
broader economic developments. The CES provides a direct, qualitative measure of 
household sentiment towards housing as an investment – namely the share of 
respondents who today consider buying a property in their neighbourhood as a good 
investment. To complement this measure, this box introduces an indirect, 
quantitative indicator of the attractiveness of housing investment for households: the 
Sharpe ratio, a widely used financial metric that relates the return on an investment 
to its risk.3

2 While residential investment is itself an expenditure component, it also has significant implications for 
other components. For instance, consumption of home goods increases when new or refurbished 
housing is equipped. Housing-related decisions tend to be strongly correlated across households, since 
they are affected by aggregate variables such as demographic transitions and credit and financing 
conditions. They therefore act as an important propagating mechanism for underlying shocks. 
Consequently, residential investment developments can have a wider impact on the economy. 
Residential investment developments in particular have been found to lead developments in GDP, 
especially before recessions. See, among others, Leamer (2007) and Leamer (2015) for the role of 
housing investment in the business cycle in the United States as well as Battistini et al. (2018) for its 
role as predictor of recessions in the euro area.

3 The Sharpe ratio measures how much excess return an investor receives for the additional volatility 
involved in holding a riskier asset. A higher ratio implies a higher return relative to the associated risk. 
The Sharpe ratio is used here as a cyclical indicator of the attractiveness of housing investment based 
on households’ expectations, rather than as a tool for comparing its risk-return profile with that of other 
asset classes. Standard caveats apply, as housing returns differ from other assets in terms of liquidity, 
leverage and distributional features.

price growth relative to prevailing risk-free rates (i.e. a higher excess return on 
housing investment), or when they are more certain about their expectations. And 
when the opposite is the case, it falls. In this way, it captures shifts in the perceived 
financial attractiveness of housing investment.

Looking at its components, in recent years the housing Sharpe ratio has 
mainly reflected fluctuations in house price growth expectations and in the 
risk-free interest rate (Chart B). Between the end of 2021 and mid-2023, the (year-
on-year growth rate of the) housing Sharpe ratio fell strongly. First house price 
growth uncertainty and later mean house price growth expectations weighed on 
households’ perceptions of the attractiveness of housing. In addition, the rise in the 
risk-free rate during the ECB’s monetary policy tightening phase also exerted 
downward pressure on the housing Sharpe ratio from mid-2022 to late 2023. The 
increase in the housing Sharpe ratio since July 2023 has been supported by a rise in 
households’ house price growth expectations, with only a minor contribution from

uncertainty.5 Moreover, it has reflected the drop in the risk-free rate, as monetary 
policy has normalised again in response to easing inflationary pressures.

The average housing Sharpe ratio over the period from April 2020 to 
September 2025 varies markedly across households according to their 
demographic and economic characteristics, as views on both future house 
prices and the uncertainty around them differ (Chart C). On average, older, 
male, wealthier, employed and more financially literate households display higher 
Sharpe ratios than the respective reference group of households. This is largely 
owing to lower uncertainty around house price expectations, although differences in 
mean house price expectations also play a role for some categories. In terms of 
housing choices, households living in cities or suburban areas report higher ratios 
than those in rural areas, mainly reflecting higher mean house price growth 
expectations. Moreover, the housing Sharpe ratio is typically lower for homeowners 
than for renters, driven by lower mean expectations. Among homeowners however it 
does not differ significantly between outright owners and those with mortgages.6

5 House price uncertainty has been on a slight downward trend since early 2022, despite significant 
volatility in households’ expectations for house price growth, which initially lost steam then recovered 
momentum. This suggests that, while households revised their mean expectations notably, uncertainty 
about the magnitude of house price growth diminished, limiting the role of uncertainty in the housing 
Sharpe ratio.

6 These patterns in the housing Sharpe ratio across housing choices differ considerably from those in the 
qualitative indicator of housing as a good investment. According to the latter, homeowners perceive 
housing as a good investment significantly more often than renters do – and this holds especially for 
those with mortgages. See Battistini et al. (2023).

The housing Sharpe ratio points to a further moderate recovery in housing 
investment. A comparison of developments in the housing Sharpe ratio and actual 
housing sales shows a close correlation between the two series, suggesting that the 
housing Sharpe ratio is a relevant indicator for monitoring broader housing market 
developments (Chart D). Specifically, the increase in the ratio up to September 2025 
indicates that housing sales are likely to continue rising, following their slight decline 
in the second quarter. This, in turn, should support a positive near-term outlook for 
housing investment and for home goods consumption, which both tend to follow 
developments in housing sales.7

Firms’ decisions to hoard labour reflect their expectations about future 
business conditions (Chart B). We categorise firms into three groups: (1) those not 
reporting a deterioration in their past business conditions (“business as usual”); (2) 
those that have faced adverse shocks but have not reduced their workforce 
(“hoarding labour”); and (3) those that have faced adverse shocks and have reduced 
their number of employees (“shedding labour”) during the last quarter. Firms in the 
“business as usual” category do not expect their sales or their investment to 
deteriorate in the next three months. Firms in the other two groups expect lower 
sales and investment, but firms hoarding labour tend to be less pessimistic about the 
near future than firms shedding employees. This suggests that labour hoarding 
decisions depend on firms’ expectations about their future business conditions, at 
least in the short term.

Firms hoarding labour expect higher labour cost growth than other firms that 
have faced a deterioration in activity, mainly owing to expectations of higher 
employment growth (Chart C). The labour cost growth expectations of firms in the 
labour hoarding group are slightly lower than those of firms in the “business as 
usual” category but generally above the expectations of firms that have shed labour. 
Decomposing this expected labour cost growth into employment and wage growth 
expectations shows that firms in the “business as usual” category expect 
employment to increase over the next year. Firms in the labour hoarding group 
expect employment to be broadly unchanged, while firms that have already shed 
labour expect employment growth to remain negative. However, firms in all groups 
tend to expect a similar moderation in nominal wage growth per worker. This pattern 
suggests that collective bargaining and centralised wage-setting mechanisms could 
play an important role.3 Thus, differences in expected labour cost growth owe mainly 
to differing employment growth expectations across the groups of firms.

3 Similarity in wage growth is also consistent with a fully decentralised competitive labour market as 
wages equalised in a competitive labour market. See Bates et al. (2025) for an overview of recent 
wage growth developments. Additionally, Bates et al. (2024) provide an analysis of collective bargaining 
agreements.

Firms reporting a deterioration in business activity tend to have lower 
expectations about future increases in their selling prices one year ahead 
(Chart D). Firms in the “business as usual” category expect their selling prices to 
continue to increase at a faster pace (by 3.1% year on year in the third quarter of 
2025) than firms that have been negatively affected by shocks to their business 
activity in the past (1.9% for firms hoarding labour and 1.6% for firms not hoarding 
labour in the third quarter of 2025). These differences are not driven by firms’ 
expectations about the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), as all groups 
have similar HICP inflation expectations on average. This suggests that 
independently of the decision to hoard labour, firms affected by a deterioration in 
their business activity do not expect to be able to increase their prices by as much as 
their peers, hinting at weaker demand for their products or stronger competitive 
pressures. This weaker pricing power while facing similar wage growth could erode 
profit margins, forcing these firms to explore other channels to lower their labour 
costs.4

Overall, there is evidence of a link between firms’ labour hoarding decisions 
and their future labour cost growth expectations. Chart E illustrates the factors 
driving firms’ total labour cost growth expectations across the groups. The higher 
labour cost growth expectations of firms in the “business as usual” category can be 
explained by their higher employment expectations (blue bars). By contrast, firms in 
the labour hoarding and labour shedding groups expect lower employment growth, 
but higher wage costs once deflated by their own selling prices (light green bars). 
This indicator of real wages is the relevant price of labour for the firms as it reflects 
their capacity to finance labour costs by raising their selling prices. Given that firms 
in the labour hoarding and labour shedding groups expect to be less able to increase 
their selling prices in the future, they expect their current workforce to become 
relatively more expensive in the coming year. Accordingly, firms’ labour cost growth 
expectations offer valuable insights for assessing labour hoarding decisions. They 
also help to better understand the cyclical recovery in labour productivity that usually 
follows periods characterised by strong labour hoarding.

Understanding the persistent food inflation in 2025 is important, not least 
because food price dynamics play a significant role in consumers’ inflation 
perceptions and short-term inflation expectations. People pay special attention 
to food price developments because they purchase food frequently, it accounts for a 
sizeable share of their budgets and there is limited scope for substitution. This 
means food purchases may disproportionately influence their beliefs about overall 
inflation.1 In its Consumer Expectations Survey (CES), the European Central Bank 
(ECB) has collected detailed information about inflation perceptions and 
expectations regarding major consumer basket items on a semi-regular basis since 
2022. The analysis shows that perceived and expected food inflation have a 
relatively strong influence on overall inflation perceptions and one-year expectations 
(Chart A, panel a). At longer horizons, food does not play such an outsized role. 
Furthermore, almost two-thirds of respondents stated that food prices influence their 
inflation expectations, a higher share than for any other basket item (Chart A, panel 
b). These respondents were more likely to expect inflation above the ECB’s 2% 
target for the next 12 months than the remaining third. Understanding recent food 
price dynamics is therefore important both for monitoring overall inflation and for 
assessing consumers’ expectations.

Food inflation has remained elevated this year, but this is mainly due to only a 
few items.2 The annual rate of euro area HICP food inflation had declined to stand 
at 2.4% in November 2025, having peaked at 15.5% in March 2023. It averaged 
2.9% in 2025 (January-November) and has remained above its pre-pandemic long-
term average of 2.2% since December 2021. Among the different HICP food 
components, the main drivers of the above-average inflation rate in 2025 are “coffee, 
tea and cocoa”, “sugar, jam, honey, chocolate and confectionary” (sweets) and

“meat”. In recent months, coffee, tea, cocoa, sweets and meat accounted for over 
50% of the annual food inflation rate, despite having a weight of less than 25% in 
HICP food. By contrast, the contributions of the remaining food items have largely 
normalised since the 2022-23 inflation surge. Attention to food inflation in the media 
has also eased, but it remains higher than in 2019 (Chart B, panel a). More recently, 
month-on-month growth rates suggest easing price pressures for some items, for 
instance, coffee, tea, cocoa and sweets (Chart B, panel b), and annual rates have 
started to come back closer to their long-term average.

Food commodity prices have been important drivers of recent consumer food 
price increases, reflecting extreme weather events as well as other structural 
factors. Cocoa and coffee commodity prices reached new peaks in early 2025, 
having more than doubled since January 2024 (Chart C, panel a). While cocoa and

coffee commodity prices have eased somewhat from their respective peaks, past 
increases have been passed through to consumer food prices with a delay. These 
increases can be partly attributed to extreme weather (Kotz et al., 2025). Similarly, 
findings from the ECB’s recent contacts with non-financial companies suggest that 
food price developments are also affected by climate change (Kuik et al., 2025). For 
example, we estimate that the 2025 summer heat wave could increase unprocessed 
food prices in the euro area by 0.4 to 0.7 percentage points after one year.3 On the 
other hand, European meat (especially beef) prices have been driven by a 
continuing structural decline in supply, amid robust demand.4 As such, European 
farm-gate prices for meat peaked in June 2025 – 17% higher than in January 2024 – 
before easing slightly thereafter.

A model-based decomposition of food inflation into its drivers also suggests 
that commodity prices have played a more important role recently (Chart C, 
panel b).5 The decomposition shows a moderation of cost pressures in recent 
months on the back of slightly lower contributions from international commodity 
prices and a smaller (now negative) contribution from an “unexplained” component

which may be linked to pass-through from past wage growth in the retail sector.6 For 
example, the latest data on sectoral compensation per employee show that wage 
growth in the trade, transport, and accommodation sector – encompassing the food 
retail sector – remained elevated in the first half of 2025, above its pre-pandemic 
average.

Looking ahead, food inflation is expected to ease further, supported in the 
near term by easing selling price expectations. The December 2025 Eurosystem 
staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area expect food inflation to decline in 
the short term, reaching 2.1% in the third quarter of 2026, and to remain at moderate 
levels throughout the rest of the projection horizon. In the very near term, this view is 
supported by manufacturers of food and beverages in the European Commission’s 
business survey, whose selling price expectations for the next three months have 
declined since April, falling below the long-term average observed between 1999 
and 2019 (Chart D). In contrast, selling price expectations among retailers of food, 
beverages and tobacco moderated less markedly and have also remained above 
their long-term average, which could partly reflect the still elevated wage growth in 
this sector.

6 Note that the model implicitly considers wages in the producing sector via producer prices.

Excess liquidity in the euro area banking system continued to decline 
gradually. Liquidity provision decreased over the review period, owing primarily to 
lower Eurosystem holdings under the asset purchase programme (APP) and 
pandemic emergency purchasing programme (PEPP) following the discontinuation 
of APP reinvestments at the beginning of July 2023 and PEPP reinvestments at the 
end of December 2024. This decrease was partly offset by the continuing reduction 
in liquidity absorption through net autonomous factors.

The average daily liquidity needs of the banking system, defined as the sum of 
net autonomous factors and reserve requirements, decreased by €30 billion to 
€1,288 billion over the review period (Chart A). This decline was driven by an 
increase in liquidity-providing autonomous factors and a slight reduction in liquidity-
absorbing autonomous factors. Minimum reserve requirements remained stable at 
€168 billion, with no effect on overall liquidity needs (Table A).

Liquidity-providing autonomous factors rose by €28 billion over the review 
period, mainly reflecting an increase of €25 billion in net assets denominated 
in euro. This overall increase was primarily attributable to the continued decline in 
euro-denominated non-monetary policy deposits. Euro-denominated non-monetary 
policy investments went up slightly, which also contributed to the increase in net 
assets denominated in euro. Meanwhile, net foreign asset holdings rose marginally 
by €3 billion, with only a minimal impact on overall liquidity conditions.

Liquidity-absorbing autonomous factors decreased by €3 billion over the 
review period, owing primarily to a decline in other autonomous factors. On 
average, net other autonomous factors fell by €18 billion, which mainly reflected a 
reduction on the liability side. Government deposits increased slightly by €6 billion to 
€110 billion, driven by higher government issuance in the autumn and, consequently, 
larger cash buffers held by national treasuries. The average value of banknotes in 
circulation increased slightly by €8 billion over the review period, reaching 
€1,591 billion.

The average amount of liquidity provided through monetary policy instruments 
decreased by €127 billion to €3,901 billion over the review period (Chart B). 
The decline in the liquidity supply was largely driven by a reduction in Eurosystem 
outright portfolios.

The average amount of liquidity provided through outright monetary policy 
portfolio holdings went down by €125 billion to €3,881 billion over the review 
period. This decline was due to maturing APP and PEPP holdings not being 
reinvested.

The average amount of liquidity provided through credit operations fell by 
€3 billion to €21 billion over the review period. The average outstanding amount 
of main refinancing operations (MROs) and three-month longer-term refinancing 
operations (LTROs) decreased by around €1 billion and €2 billion respectively. 
Banks’ muted participation in these regular operations reflects their comfortable 
liquidity position and the availability of alternative funding sources at attractive 
market rates and maturities.

The EU Single Market brings together 450 million people and 26 million 
businesses. It is one of the cornerstones of European integration, serving as a 
dynamic engine for welfare gains, competitiveness and resilience. By facilitating the 
free movement of goods, services, capital and labour, it has enhanced economic 
efficiency through economies of scale, stronger competition and increased 
innovation. ECB research indicates that between 1993 and 2014 the Single Market 
increased real GDP per capita by 12-22% across founding Member States 
(Lehtimäki and Sondermann, 2020), while studies by Mion and Ponattu (2019) 
estimate average annual welfare gains of around €840 per person, expressed in 
2016 prices.

The Single Market delivers broad economic and strategic benefits for the EU 
and its Member States. A well-functioning Single Market improves productivity and 
resilience because it provides the scale for companies to innovate and grow. It also 
promotes price convergence and strengthens the transmission of monetary policy, 
which are of particular relevance to the ECB. Moreover, as underlined by Letta 
(2024) and Draghi (2024), it stands as Europe’s first line of defence in the face of a 
rapidly evolving geopolitical landscape.

However, the Single Market continues to face structural obstacles that prevent 
the realisation of its full potential. Remaining barriers – particularly to the cross-
border provision of services, but also to the circulation of goods and the free 
movement of labour and capital – limit the depth of integration and the scope of 
potential welfare gains.1 Overcoming these limitations is essential for further 
strengthening the EU’s resilience, fostering competitiveness, enhancing defence 
capabilities and safeguarding economic stability.

This article assesses part of the untapped potential of the Single Market, 
specifically addressing the circulation of goods and services. The first section 
briefly traces the historical development of the Single Market and examines the 
current degree of trade integration. The second section describes the barriers that 
impede the free movement of goods and services within the EU. The third section 
quantifies the scale of the barriers through the lens of a gravity model. And finally,

the fourth section assesses the potential welfare gains achievable through further 
integration.

Removing barriers to the movement of goods has resulted in rapid EU goods 
trade integration, while services markets remain less integrated. Chart 1 
compares intra-EU and extra-EU trade, used as an indicator of the degree of 
integration within and outside the Single Market respectively. Trade in goods has 
clearly benefited from deeper integration within the EU, which is not the case for 
services. In 2024 cross-border trade in goods within the EU accounted for over 40% 
of EU GDP, up from 30% in 1999 and around 16 percentage points higher than trade 
between the EU and the rest of the world. Over the same period, intra-EU trade in 
services rose from 8% of GDP in 1999 to 16% in 2024, a level very similar to extra-
EU trade in services. This contrast between goods and services integration is all the 
more striking given that services account for nearly three-quarters of economic 
activity in the EU.

Comparatively low services trade integration can be attributed, in part, to the 
localised nature of services. Many services, such as healthcare, education, legal 
consultancy or real estate, may require proximity to the consumer or adaptation to 
local cultural, legal or linguistic contexts, making cross-border provision more 
challenging. To some extent, it also reflects the fact that a significant share of service 
provision occurs via the establishment of subsidiaries or branches.3

The depth of Single Market integration varies significantly across subsectors. 
Highly harmonised manufacturing industries such as motor vehicles, chemicals and 
electronics benefit from EU-wide standards, mutual recognition agreements and 
extensive cross-border supply chains. For example, the automotive sector relies on 
cross-border supply chains for parts and assembly, while chemicals and electronics 
benefit from harmonised EU standards that ease trade across Member States. In 
contrast, primary goods, such as food products and pharmaceutical products, remain 
far less integrated because of a combination of national regulations, differences in 
standards and logistical barriers, as well as non-policy determinants such as cultural 
factors, consumer preferences and limited tradability of certain products (Chart 2).4 
Service sectors display an equally uneven landscape. Business and support services 
achieve relatively high integration under the Services Directive, whereas retail, 
construction, professional activities and real estate face persistent national and local 
barriers.

3 Many services require the establishment of local subsidiaries or branches, which are classified as 
foreign direct investment (FDI) rather than cross-border service exports. The value of services provided 
through these local establishments does not appear in cross-border trade statistics. This means that 
official data on intra-EU trade in services might understate the actual level of integration, as they do not 
capture the substantial volume of services delivered via FDI channels.

4 Chart 2 reports intra-EU trade data based on gross exports, which include both final and intermediate 
products. While this leads to some degree of double counting due to intermediate goods crossing 
borders multiple times before final production, it also highlights the depth of economic integration and 
the significance of intra-EU value chain linkages.

Barriers persist within the EU Single Market.5 They originate from a multitude of 
sources, including: (a) differences in national rules or regulations; (b) cumbersome 
administrative procedures; (c) inconsistent application of EU rules and gold-plating; 
and (d) national anticompetition practices that put non-domestic firms at a 
disadvantage. In addition, barriers can also differ across sectors. Goods markets 
often face divergent technical standards, non-tariff barriers and high compliance 
costs. Services face challenges from labour mobility restrictions and regulatory 
differences, which complicate cross-border business. Regulatory fragmentation can 
hinder trade and investment in both goods and services. This section presents a 
short overview of the principal barriers affecting intra-EU trade, categorised 
according to the source of the barriers.

Regulatory barriers refer to fragmented rules or requirements that restrict the 
free movement of goods and services across borders. Different rules and 
standards across Member States may limit cross-border market access or raise 
compliance costs for firms. Significant disparities in product standards and technical 
requirements persist across the EU. A fragmented value added tax regime – with 27 
distinct national frameworks – is also an obstacle to cross-border trade. For services, 
the recognition of professional qualifications impedes worker mobility.

Administrative barriers typically encompass lengthy, cumbersome or unclear 
procedures that complicate compliance and delivery. Administrative barriers 
arise typically from the procedures surrounding the implementation and enforcement 
of regulations. These include complex authorisation procedures, excessive 
documentation requirements, delays in obtaining permits or a lack of coordination 
between national authorities. Exporters may need import licences, conformity 
assessments and tailored documentation for national regulations, while lengthy 
product registration and a lack of digital reporting systems complicate compliance. In 
the field of services, residency and nationality requirements – while mostly curbed by 
EU law – can still arise through national rules like residency obligations for legal 
accountability.

Enforcement barriers relate to the inconsistent application of EU rules or lack 
of oversight mechanisms. Differences in the interpretation and application of EU 
directives across Member States undermine the Single Market, as national 
authorities often prioritise domestic standards over EU law, creating legal uncertainty 
or failing to meet minimum standards. Gold-plating – the practice of adding national 
requirements beyond the minimum required to implement EU law – further increases 
costs and burdens, forcing companies to adapt to varying obligations.

Competition-related barriers relate to discriminatory practices or unequal 
treatment that put non-domestic firms at a disadvantage. For both goods and 
services, legal constraints such as local language requirements, price controls and 
nationally restricted tax incentives or targeted subsidies raise operational costs or 
restrict access for foreign competitors. In the services sector, fragmentation stems 
from local content requirements, which are officially prohibited but are often 
introduced in disguised form. In sectors like energy, defence and 
telecommunications, public procurement processes tend to favour domestic firms. 
Studies indicate that only about 5% of public procurement contracts are awarded to 
non-domestic firms.6

Obstacles to the effective functioning of the Single Market are compounded by 
multiple layers of structural and practical barriers. Accessing clear and 
comprehensive information remains a major challenge within the Single Market, as 
businesses frequently face difficulties finding up-to-date guidance on national rules 
and requirements. Lengthy enforcement processes and inefficient judicial systems 
further fracture the regulatory landscape and undermine legal certainty. In the 
financial sector, the lack of a fully realised Capital Markets Union – with a single 
supervisor and harmonised resolution mechanisms – undermines cross-border 
investment and financial integration. These issues are further compounded by

patchy transport and digital communication infrastructure, which restricts efficient 
connectivity.

Data on barriers that hinder the functioning of the Single Market are limited. 
Regulatory restrictions, administrative requirements and other barriers can be 
difficult to capture and complex to quantify. Existing indicators often rely on 
subjective evaluations, expert assessments or partial coverage, with limited 
consistency across sectors and time. Some indicators rely on expert assessments of 
regulatory frameworks to quantify restrictions in the services sector, while others 
systematically record and classify policy measures deemed harmful to trade. EU-
level data focus on the implementation of and compliance with EU rules. By contrast, 
a few business surveys capture firms’ perceptions of administrative burdens, market 
access obstacles and regulatory uncertainty. The European Commission (2025a) 
indicates that, while over the years the EU has removed many barriers to trade in the 
Single Market, new sources of fragmentation continue to appear. This results in a 
pattern of increased barriers. Specifically, the Commission has identified a set of the 
“Terrible 10” barriers which persistently fragment cross-border activity despite 
harmonised EU rules (European Commission, 2025a). These include discriminatory 
authorisation procedures, disproportionate professional qualification requirements, 
unjustified territorial supply constraints, limits on cross-border establishment, barriers 
to digital and data mobility, and restrictions on the provision of services across 
borders.