When the US Administration announced a new set of tariffs in April this year, it caused 
a spike in financial market volatility while testing stretched market valuations. Although 
expectations for tariff rates have eased somewhat since then, the repercussions of the 
shock continue to reverberate and the risks of an economic slowdown have increased 
markedly. Financial markets across the globe sold off at an unsettling speed in early 
April and financial conditions tightened considerably. While risky assets have been 
recovering their losses since temporary tariff pauses were announced, markets 
remain highly sensitive to news about global trade arrangements.

The abrupt change in US tariff policy forms part of a larger shift in the geopolitical 
environment, with economic and financial impacts that could yet test euro area 
financial stability. Uncertainty lingers within many important policy domains beyond 
trade – from regulation to national security. In this environment, the likelihood of 
increasingly frequent and impactful adverse tail events has increased. Furthermore, 
while global imbalances remain a long-standing issue in the policy debate, it is not 
clear that tariffs are the best-placed policy instrument to address them.

Financial market functioning held up well during the recent sell-off. Despite the 
drawdowns, equity valuations remain high while credit spreads still appear out of sync 
with underlying credit risk. Open-ended funds investing in corporate bonds have seen 
some outflows and do not appear well prepared to withstand significant liquidity stress. 
In the event of renewed turmoil, these funds may be forced to sell assets. This could 
turn price swings into more disorderly adjustments.

The euro area is an open economy, with firms strongly integrated into global supply 
chains. Trade frictions will have a direct impact on the revenues and costs of those 
companies that rely on foreign trade. Furthermore, adverse confidence effects are 
likely to lead market players to act with greater caution, which could also engulf 
sectors that are less exposed to the direct effects of tariffs. This may challenge the 
management of credit risk by euro area financial intermediaries. Should economic 
growth fall short of expectations, moreover, this could put pressure on government 
finances, which are already facing strains from higher defence spending needs.

Intensifying trade tensions have triggered a spike in market volatility, fears of 
slowing economic growth and a sharp repricing in financial markets. The higher

Against this backdrop, three key sources of risk and vulnerability for euro area 
financial stability stand out. First, price adjustments in stretched and concentrated 
asset markets risk becoming disorderly, particularly if liquidity and leverage fragilities 
in parts of the non-bank financial intermediation sector amplify asset price swings. 
Second, rising trade tensions could affect euro area corporates and households both

directly, via exposures to tariff-sensitive activities, and indirectly, via confidence 
effects, translating into credit risks for banks and non-banks. Third, a combination of 
weaker growth, defence spending needs and other structural challenges could 
compound the already strained fiscal positions of some euro area sovereigns. The 
potential for these vulnerabilities to materialise simultaneously given common triggers, 
possibly amplifying each other further, increases the risk to financial stability.

Financial markets, particularly equity markets, remain vulnerable to sudden 
and sharp adjustments due to persistently high valuations and risk 
concentration. Previous editions of the Financial Stability Review have warned about 
the vulnerabilities posed by high valuations that are not backed by fundamentals. This 
source of risk has now partly materialised, with the larger than expected US import 
tariffs announced on 2 April 2025 acting as the trigger. Despite notable declines 
following this announcement, US equity valuations have remained high since the 
market recovery. Meanwhile, strong market concentration, along with exposures to a 
handful of large firms (mostly US-based technology companies), continues to expose 
global markets to risks arising from shocks to these entities. Credit spreads have risen 
too but they still appear to be out of sync with the currently very high level of 
geopolitical and policy uncertainty (Chart 3, panel a). As such, investors may be 
underestimating and underpricing the likelihood and impact of adverse scenarios, not 
least because soaring uncertainty renders the materialisation of tail events more likely. 
Negative surprises – including sharply deteriorating economic growth prospects, 
sudden changes in monetary policy expectations or an escalation of trade tensions – 
could lead to further abrupt shifts in investor sentiment, causing spillovers across 
different asset classes while fuelling investors’ interest in alternative asset classes 
such as gold (Box 2).

Real estate markets have shown signs of recovery but face headwinds from 
elevated uncertainty. The downturn in euro area commercial real estate (CRE) 
markets appears to be bottoming out as recent price corrections have reduced 
broader overvaluation, while easing monetary policy has strengthened confidence in 
CRE markets to some extent (Section 1.5). That said, downside risks prevail, as the 
sector continues to be challenged by structural factors such as lower demand for office 
space and for non-prime and non-energy efficient properties – which is also evident in 
higher vacancy rates. Similarly, residential real estate (RRE) prices have shown signs 
of improvement in countries that experienced rapidly falling prices from their 2022 
peaks, supported by improving demand for mortgage loans on the back of lower 
interest rates. However, tail risks remain due to persisting RRE overvaluation in some 
countries and possible adverse effects should unemployment rates rise. In fact, real 
estate markets are highly sensitive to fluctuations in long-term interest rates and 
business cycle developments, which implies notable downside risks against the 
current backdrop of high macroeconomic uncertainty and geopolitical risks.

The liquidity and leverage weaknesses of euro area non-banks could amplify 
market drawdowns. Overall, non-banks have so far weathered adverse market 
disturbances relatively well. The non-bank financial intermediation (NBFI) sector has 
also continued to absorb a high proportion of sovereign debt, underscoring the 
important role it plays in euro area sovereign bond markets in a context of higher debt 
issuance. That said, in an environment of heightened geopolitical and trade policy 
uncertainty, non-banks may face higher valuation losses and more frequent margin 
calls as trade tensions increase market volatility and weigh on asset quality in 
corporate portfolios. Significant exposures to US dollar assets may also increase the 
risk of additional spillovers from potential US market shocks and exchange rate 
fluctuations, especially where equity portfolios are concentrated in a few large US 
issuers. Declining liquid asset holdings (Box 5) and significant liquidity mismatches in 
some types of open-ended investment fund (e.g. corporate bond funds), coupled with 
procyclical fund flow dynamics, could amplify adverse market shocks (Chart 3, 
panel b). At the same time, pockets of elevated financial and synthetic leverage in 
some entities (e.g. hedge funds) may exacerbate the risk of financial contagion and 
expose liquidity vulnerabilities through margin calls (Chart 3, panel c).

Persistent liquidity and leverage vulnerabilities in the NBFI sector require a 
comprehensive policy response. A bigger market footprint and the increased 
interconnectedness of non-banks raises the risk of NBFI vulnerabilities amplifying 
adverse market developments across the financial system. This calls for a 
comprehensive set of policy measures aimed at increasing the sector’s resilience to

market-wide shocks. An adequate policy response should focus on addressing key 
structural vulnerabilities in the NBFI sector, including monitoring and tackling risks 
arising from non-bank leverage, enhancing the liquidity preparedness of non-bank 
market participants to meet margin and collateral calls, and mitigating liquidity 
mismatch in the investment fund sector. The further deepening and integration of 
capital markets forms part of a renewed strategy aimed at supporting Europe’s 
productivity and economic growth in a competitive global environment. Strengthening 
NBFI policies from a macroprudential perspective would help ensure that non-banks 
remain resilient under stress, underpinning the long-term success of the capital 
markets union agenda. Enhanced EU-wide supervisory coordination will be needed to 
foster a level playing field and reduce the potential for regulatory arbitrage.

Escalating trade tensions could affect euro area firms and 
households, implying credit risks for banks and non-banks

Euro area firms and households have seen balance sheet fundamentals 
improve in recent years, but trade tensions, high funding costs and a weaker 
growth outlook point towards future headwinds. On aggregate, euro area 
corporate and household balance sheets have improved markedly in recent years, 
with indebtedness falling below the levels observed prior to the global financial crisis. 
That said, higher interest costs continue to weigh on firm profitability even as new 
lending rates decline, while insolvencies have been rising across sectors and 
countries in light of continued weak and uncertain business prospects. On top of 
increased foreign competition, mounting global trade tensions could add to credit risk 
in the corporate sector (Chart 4, panel a), which would have a negative impact on the 
profitability of firms operating in highly export-oriented and tariff-sensitive sectors such 
as steel and carmaking. Households are currently continuing to benefit from stable 
labour markets, rising real wages and higher savings. However, this situation could 
reverse should trade-related corporate vulnerabilities unravel and lay-offs in the 
corporate sector rise, translating into possible adverse employment and consumption 
effects. Any notable tightening of financial and credit conditions induced by trade 
uncertainty could amplify these adverse effects, particularly if also accompanied by 
weakening consumer confidence and increased precautionary household savings.

Euro area banks’ asset quality remains robust, but non-performing loans and 
provisioning needs may rise in the wake of rising trade tensions. On aggregate, 
euro area banks’ non-performing loan (NPL) ratios remain near historic lows, despite a 
slight uptick in 2024 driven mainly by net NPL inflows in the corporate loan book 
(notably CRE and SME loans). That said, the credit risk outlook for corporate and 
household portfolios remains tilted to the downside, given weak macro-financial 
conditions, the lagged impact of high interest rates on borrowers and escalating trade 
tensions. As such, banks may yet face higher provisioning costs if risks in 
non-financial sectors materialise. In particular, any broader and longer-lasting 
macro-financial effects of trade policy uncertainty could lead to a deterioration of bank 
asset quality, with stronger effects on banks with higher exposures to sectors relying 
on extra-EU trade (Chart 4, panel b and Special Feature B).

The ability of banks to absorb further asset quality deterioration is supported 
by the strength of profitability and ample capital and liquidity buffers. Robust net 
interest income and strong non-interest income growth enabled euro area banks to 
maintain high levels of return on equity (above 9%) in 2024. Banks’ resilience is also 
supported by capital and liquidity ratios that are well above regulatory requirements 
(Section 3.5). There are, however, persistent downside risks to bank profitability 
arising from lower net interest income, especially for banks with a higher share of 
floating-rate loans, and a higher cost of risk. A highly uncertain external environment 
reinforces the need for macroprudential capital buffer requirements to be kept at levels 
that preserve banking sector resilience. Existing borrower-based measures should be 
maintained to ensure sound lending standards in all phases of the financial cycle. The 
prevailing regulatory and supervisory framework, including in the macroprudential 
remit, has been effective in maintaining financial stability while also supporting 
economic growth. Nevertheless, there is scope for making the framework more 
efficient and effective by reducing unwarranted complexities without compromising 
bank resilience or undermining compliance with the Basel framework, and by 
completing the banking union.

Asset quality in non-bank portfolios may be impaired by deteriorating corporate 
fundamentals and property market conditions. Downgrades in the corporate debt

portfolios of euro area non-banks have remained relatively stable in recent years. 
However, weak economic conditions, coupled with rising protectionism and trade 
policy uncertainty, have led to a deteriorating credit risk outlook, exposing the NBFI 
sector to revaluation losses from unexpected downgrades and increasing default risk. 
In particular, trade tensions may weigh on corporate asset quality, with exposures to 
sectors that are both import and export-reliant primarily concentrated in equity funds 
(Chart 4, panel c). Risks also extend to non-banks’ real estate portfolios. Any further 
decline in CRE prices – triggered by downside risk to the wider macroeconomic 
environment, for example – could lead to an increase in fund outflows. Strong linkages 
could cause any stress in the NBFI sector to spill over to euro area banks, especially 
via the funding channel.

Defence spending needs and material downside risks to 
growth reinforce sovereign vulnerabilities

Planned increases in defence spending may unlock positive growth effects if 
focused on productive investment and sourced from within the EU. Risks to euro 
area sovereigns have shifted from political uncertainties tied to national elections to 
broader geopolitical concerns in recent months. The European Commission’s recently 
announced “ReArm Europe Plan/Readiness 2030” aims to bolster national security 
across Europe. The plan includes unleashing public funding for defence at the national 
level by activating the national escape clause of the Stability and Growth Pact, 
enabling Member States to act swiftly. Higher defence spending has the potential to 
stimulate economic growth, provided spending is targeted towards productive 
investments in European defence industrial capabilities and R&D. Moreover, sourcing 
defence equipment from within the EU would imply a higher fiscal multiplier, with the 
stimulus possibly helping to absorb some of the slack currently affecting sectors like 
the automotive industry.

However, planned fiscal expansion could also challenge the balance sheets of 
euro area sovereigns. Higher defence spending, along with the substantial 
infrastructure investments announced in the euro area, is likely to lead to an increase 
in the supply of sovereign bonds. Against the backdrop of the Eurosystem’s reduced 
footprint in bond markets, the capacity of the investor base to absorb any additional 
issuance will be key to the orderly functioning of sovereign bond markets. Market 
expectations of higher government financing needs as well as possible positive growth 
effects have contributed to a rise in ten-year euro area sovereign bond yields. The rise 
was, however, partly reversed as a result of flight-to-safety flows into euro area 
sovereign bond markets following US tariff announcements. Higher defence spending 
and an increase in the cost of servicing debt could further strain fiscal positions, 
especially in countries which have high short-term refinancing needs and are already 
burdened by large debt levels (Chart 5, panel a). That said, most of the more highly 
indebted countries have so far not pledged to greatly increase their defence spending. 
Moreover, risks to growth resulting from trade tensions and higher defence spending 
may limit the fiscal space needed to shelter the economy from future adverse shocks,

as well as to address structural challenges associated with digitalisation, low 
productivity, population ageing (Special Feature C) and climate change.

Unless potential growth can be raised, concerns about sovereign debt 
sustainability could re-emerge in some countries. Despite a post-pandemic 
decline, the government debt-to-GDP ratio is still above the long-term average for the 
euro area aggregate, unlike the corporate and household sectors (Chart 5, panel b). 
At the same time, the aggregate euro area public debt ratio remains well below that of 
international peers. Debt-financed increases in defence spending and further rising 
interest expenditures may complicate the path towards fiscal consolidation in some 
countries under the new EU fiscal framework and could cause debt levels to start 
rising again. This, together with structural headwinds to potential growth from factors 
like weak productivity, could rekindle concerns about the sustainability of sovereign 
debt. Any repricing of sovereign risk could spill over to the corporate and financial 
sectors via rating downgrades and higher funding costs.

While the euro area financial system is resilient overall, 
shifting geopolitical conditions could test financial stability

All in all, the financial stability landscape has seen a major uncertainty shock 
since the previous edition of the Financial Stability Review was published. 
Despite multiple sources of resilience in both euro area financial and non-financial 
sectors, there is no room for complacency. Uncertainties arising from trade tensions, 
deregulation and reduced international cooperation are fuelling concerns about global 
economic and regulatory fragmentation. Rising trade tensions pose particular risks for 
the euro area, given its open economy and deep integration within global supply 
chains. In this highly uncertain and volatile environment, the likelihood of tail events 
remains high. Risk sentiment could deteriorate again as some risky asset valuations 
remain high. Increased defence spending, while having the potential to boost growth if 
well targeted and sourced from within the EU, may exacerbate fiscal vulnerabilities in 
some countries. While euro area corporates and households are resilient on 
aggregate, trade policy uncertainty could have an adverse impact on trade-reliant 
firms, with associated broader economic repercussions translating into rising credit 
risk for banks and non-banks.

In addition, several cross-cutting structural issues remain critical for financial 
stability and could amplify existing cyclical vulnerabilities. These include 
cybersecurity weaknesses in a challenging geopolitical landscape (Box 1), the 
growing importance of artificial intelligence (which provides both opportunities and 
risks of destabilisation along the innovation path), risks stemming from global 
regulatory fragmentation, challenges associated with ageing populations and 
climate-related risks on the way to a low-carbon economy. The potential for these 
cyclical and structural vulnerabilities to materialise simultaneously and amplify one 
another heightens the risks to financial stability. This could lead to adverse feedback 
loops across various sectors.

1.1 
Trade tensions, policy uncertainty and geopolitical risks 
weigh on growth outlook

Euro area growth has continued to recover at a moderate pace. Euro area GDP 
grew by 0.9% in 2024. Growth was driven by private and government consumption 
and net exports, albeit with large differences across countries (Chart 1.1, panel a). 
Buoyed by stable real wage growth and high savings, households are in a good 
position to increase consumption still further (Section 1.4). Moreover, the easing of 
financing conditions following the ECB’s policy rate cuts since June 2024 should

support the recovery going forward. In line with this, survey indicators point towards a 
notable easing of the downturn in the relatively interest-rate-sensitive industrial 
sectors (Chart 1.1, panel b), while services sectors have generally been performing 
better than industrials.

Growth expectations for 2025 have been revised downwards as weak external 
demand and domestic structural challenges persist. Low productivity growth and 
a loss of competitiveness, especially in industrial sectors such as the automotive 
industry, continue to weigh on economic growth. The higher energy costs seen since 
Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine have represented a particular competitive 
disadvantage for euro area firms. In addition, domestic demand in China has 
remained muted as a result of the housing sector crisis, leading to lower demand for 
European goods and overproduction in the manufacturing sector. Manufactured 
goods not absorbed in China are being exported instead, increasing competition for 
European firms. An appreciating euro may further compound these challenges, 
especially for export-oriented firms. As such, growth expectations for 2025 have been 
revised downwards since the previous edition of the Financial Stability Review was 
published (Chart 1.1, panel c).

Trade tensions are a source of significant downside risks for euro area growth 
and may lead to global fragmentation. The euro area economy is open to trade and 
is highly integrated into global supply chains (Chart 1.2, panel a). As such, the 
implementation of protectionist measures such as tariffs and other trade barriers by

major trading partners is expected to have a negative impact on euro area growth and, 
potentially, financial stability (Special Feature B). While the current account with the 
United States is relatively balanced overall, the euro area has a sizeable surplus in 
goods trade, rendering export-oriented euro area firms particularly vulnerable to US 
tariffs (Chart 1.2, panel b and Section 1.3). Firms could also be indirectly affected by 
tariffs on countries producing for the US market if trade were rerouted to the domestic 
or other third markets, resulting in intense competition. A renewed escalation of trade 
tensions with a cycle of retaliation would risk igniting a trade war, with significant 
downside risks to euro area and global growth and increasing geoeconomic 
fragmentation.

The outlook for euro area growth is also clouded by high economic policy 
uncertainty and geopolitical risks, but increased defence spending may 
catalyse economic activity. Uncertainty about economic policies beyond trade has 
been rising against the backdrop of a shifting geopolitical landscape. Since the 2024 
US presidential election, uncertainty has surged further as the new US Administration 
has changed direction in several policy areas. Such sustained uncertainty is blurring 
the planning horizon for firms and households and could delay investment and 
consumption decisions. In addition, the war in Ukraine and the conflict in the Middle 
East remain unresolved, despite recent peace efforts. A further escalation in either or 
both of these could weigh on euro area growth, dampening firm and household 
confidence. It could also affect energy markets that are already posing challenges due 
to volatility and possible increases in natural gas prices. Firms could also face 
operational disruptions caused by incidents affecting critical infrastructures or by 
cyberattacks (Box 1). In this environment, the EU has forged ahead with a number of 
initiatives targeting greater self-reliance in the defence of Europe. These include a

push towards greater defence spending and the strengthening of defence capabilities 
and cooperation. Additional government outlays in this context could cushion the 
potential economic slack deriving from trade frictions. This could also act as a catalyst 
for longer-term growth, but only if well calibrated and accompanied by structural 
reforms aimed at tackling low productivity and fostering the innovation needed to 
promote the competitiveness of euro area economies (Section 1.2).

Both the prevalence of geopolitical risks and their actual manifestation have been rising in 
recent years. Geopolitical threats have waxed and waned since the turn of the millennium, at times 
escalating into hostile action. This situation has been accompanied by a longer-standing trend of 
increasing geopolitical tension and global fragmentation (Chart A, panel a). In this context, 
cyberattacks are playing an increasingly important role in the perpetration of hybrid conflicts. While 
the precise number of cyberattacks – both successful and unsuccessful – remains unknown, publicly 
disclosed data indicate that the volume of such attacks has increased substantially over the past 
decade, with a significant number of state-sponsored attacks seen in some years (Chart A, panel b)1. 
Moreover, a number of countries conduct cyber activity not just via dedicated military or intelligence 
units but also via groups of cyber criminals acting on their behalf.2 Against this backdrop, this box 
explores the threat to financial stability arising from state-sponsored cyberattacks.

1 This box draws on data from the EuRepoC database, which collects information on cyber incidents based 
on publicly available sources such as newspaper reports, also tracking attributions of attacks to threat 
actors. As such, it is likely not fully representative of the true threat landscape. Patterns over time can be 
influenced by factors related to how data are collected, the extent to which cyberattacks are reported and 
changes to regulatory disclosure requirements. In addition, it is difficult to attribute cyberattacks to 
specific actors, especially due to an often high degree of plausible deniability. Data for this box were 
downloaded on 26 February 2025 and include incidents up until 25 February 2025. For a stable version of 
the data set see Zettl-Schabath, K., et al., “Global Dataset of Cyber Incidents (1.3.2)”, European 
Repository of Cyber Incidents, 2025.

Geopolitical rivalry is increasingly playing out in cyber space, with most state-sponsored 
cyberattacks originating from a handful of countries. Historically, the main tool used to settle 
geopolitical disputes between countries has generally been armed conflict. However, the toolkit 
employed alongside diplomacy to achieve strategic goals without resorting to physical force has 
evolved. The effectiveness of the tools employed depends heavily on the geoeconomic and political 
position of the countries involved. At the same time, hybrid techniques, including espionage, 
infrastructure sabotage and influence campaigns, are increasingly being used to pursue conflicts by 
other means. While such techniques are not new, the rise of the internet and digitalisation since the 
1980s has turned cyber space into a key battleground where such activities may be carried out and 
has opened up new avenues of attack. As such, the degree to which countries have used 
cyberattacks to further their national interests varies greatly, with a relatively small cluster of 
countries, often classified as authoritarian regimes, being responsible for the majority of 
state-sponsored attacks (Chart B, panel a). Such cyberattacks are clearly linked to geopolitical risk 
factors, but policy uncertainty in both sponsoring countries and targeted countries also seems to play 
a role at times. The frequency of state-sponsored cyberattacks tends to increase when sponsoring 
countries encounter geopolitical risks or economic policy uncertainties. Similarly, target countries 
experience more attacks under conditions of heightened geopolitical risk or economic policy 
uncertainty (Chart B, panel b).

The threat of cyberattacks to financial stability is significant, given the growing digitalisation 
and interconnectedness within the financial system.4 Cyberattacks can pose systemic risks by

potentially disrupting critical financial services and operations, especially if an attack has an impact 
on a critical entity or if interconnections between non-critical entities lead to cascading effects. The 
propagation channels of these attacks include operational, financial and confidence avenues which 
can amplify the impact of attacks until they impair key economic functions. The potential for 
cyberattacks to threaten financial stability depends on the scope and severity of the impact, along 
with factors such as substitutability, risk correlation and interconnectedness. Attacks on 
infrastructures without ready substitutes or that expose vulnerabilities in other services can propagate 
widespread stress. As such, increasing dependence on third-party offerings, including centralised 
cloud technologies, opens up channels through which cyberattacks can cause stress in the financial 
system, even without targeting financial entities.

State-sponsored cyberattacks will remain a major threat, with the potential to cause systemic 
disruptions in areas like financial stability. In an environment of heightened geopolitical tensions 
and active conflicts, there is a particularly high risk of sovereign states employing cyberattacks to 
achieve their objectives. In contrast to cyber criminals, who are often driven by financial motives, 
state-sponsored attackers can deploy substantially larger resources when preparing their attacks, 
aiming to cause maximum disruption. These cyber threats can also pose risks to financial stability, as 
financial institutions and infrastructures could face major operational impediments if critical third-party 
providers or the critical infrastructures they rely on were severely disrupted. Although financial crises 
have been successfully dealt with in the past, the banking sector has much less experience of coping 
with a cyber-related crisis, and the playbook for such a scenario is less clear. It is therefore of the

utmost importance that authorities and financial institutions alike continue to pay close attention to 
developments in the cyber threat landscape, while fostering a mutual understanding of related risks 
and cooperating to build resilience and develop mitigation measures.

Euro area sovereign budgets are facing cyclical and structural challenges in an 
uncertain international environment. Many euro area countries, including some 
large economies, are expected to run sizeable budget deficits in 2025, complicating 
the path towards fiscal consolidation under the new EU fiscal framework (Chart 1.3, 
panel a). In addition, global trade tensions, coupled with high uncertainty about the 
outlook for other economic and regulatory policies as well as ongoing geopolitical 
conflicts, present pronounced downside risks to economic growth. As such, weaker 
growth would weigh on fiscal positions and further limit fiscal space to react to adverse 
shocks in many euro area countries. These conditions present obstacles to the high 
levels of investment and spending needed to tackle the structural challenges 
associated with climate change, digitalisation, ageing populations, low productivity 
and defence.

Necessary increases in defence spending could have a significant impact on 
budgets, requiring more fiscal space. As European security parameters shift, some 
governments are aiming to boost self-reliance in defence. Given the wide range of 
current defence expenditures and the new spending target currently under discussion 
in European and international fora, some countries may need to make substantial 
increases. The short-term capacity to meet these needs varies greatly because 
refinancing needs and debt levels are uneven across countries (Chart 1.3, panel b). 
Accordingly, most of the more highly indebted countries have so far not pledged to 
greatly increase their defence spending. To create the required fiscal space, the 
European Commission’s “ReArm Europe Plan/Readiness 2030”5 suggests activating 
the national escape clause of the Stability and Growth Pact and disbursing loans from 
new joint borrowing using the Security Action for Europe (SAFE) instrument. In 
addition, the plan suggests repurposing parts of the existing EU budget and mobilising 
private capital by accelerating the formation of a savings and investment union. The 
European Investment Bank could also play a role.

Debt levels and interest costs are set to rise and will weigh on government 
finances beyond the short to medium term. After falling from the highs reached

during the COVID-19 pandemic, sovereign debt levels may rise again as increases in 
defence spending and potential further stimulus packages will be financed largely by 
additional debt (Chart 1.4, panel a). Despite lower ECB policy rates, current 
borrowing costs exceed the interest rates sovereigns pay on existing debt (Chart 1.4, 
panel b). Given the relatively long average maturity of new sovereign debt, the 
refinancing of maturing debt issued at very low rates before 2022 at current market 
conditions, together with the issuance required to finance additional spending, is likely 
to increase interest payments relative to GDP for years to come.6 As the Eurosystem 
is continuously reducing its presence in the bond market, the private sector needs to 
increasingly absorb new sovereign debt. Euro area banks, non-banks and foreign 
investors have increased their holdings of euro area sovereign bonds since the end of 
quantitative easing. While some investors may require higher yields, overall they 
seem well positioned to provide further liquidity if this is needed (Sections 2.3 
and 3.4)7.

A well-planned fiscal expansion, combined with structural reforms, could foster 
long-term growth and ensure debt sustainability. Debt-driven fiscal expansion 
must remain sustainable and comply with the new EU fiscal framework to retain the 
confidence of creditors. Over the medium to long term, higher defence spending 
should be funded out of government coffers, raised either by collecting new revenues 
or by reprioritising budgets to enable appropriate fiscal consolidation. Additional 
defence spending should therefore promote euro area growth while enhancing 
defence capabilities in a timely manner. For instance, the fiscal multiplier could be 
increased by sourcing from within the EU or investing in domestic military research 
and development which could result in technological spillovers to civilian industries.8 
Structural reforms are essential to tackle low productivity, and stimulus packages 
should focus on investments that enhance euro area growth potential. However, more 
fragmented parliaments may create political deadlock, causing crucial reforms to be 
delayed.9 Consequently, funding costs for sovereigns could increase rapidly if market 
participants or rating agencies were to reassess sovereign risk. Given the benchmark 
role of sovereign bonds, any such repricing could easily spill over to funding conditions 
for banks and non-financial corporations (Chart 1.4, panel c). This would negatively 
affect investment and business activity, slow growth and add to debt sustainability 
concerns.

Improved financing conditions are shoring up firms’ resilience, but interest 
expenses and macroeconomic uncertainty are weighing on balance sheets. 
Even though interest rates on new business loans are falling, firms’ debt servicing 
capacity remains weak because of compressed interest coverage ratios and revenue 
generation. In addition, weak economic activity and profitability are posing a challenge 
to corporate resilience in the euro area (Chart 1.5, panel a). Recent survey data signal 
that firms are becoming wary about the long-term effects of an environment riddled 
with geopolitical and macroeconomic uncertainty. More specifically, euro area banks 
have again reported a tightening of credit standards for loans to firms on the back of an 
increased perception of risk and lower risk tolerance. In addition, the reported share of 
rejected loan applications has increased for SMEs, driven by developments in 
Germany, with banks pointing to higher credit risk for smaller firms.10 This is echoed 
by firms reporting muted demand for bank loans amid lower lending rates and slightly 
tighter other loan conditions.11 For the time being, the prevailing wait-and-see 
dynamics suggest that corporate investment might trend sideways.

Macroeconomic and financial headwinds are clouding the outlook for firm 
solvency in the short term. The debt service ratio of euro area firms worsened 
further in 2024, driven by sluggish growth, the resultant stagnant net income and 
further increases in firms’ interest expenses. Corporate insolvencies were on the rise 
up to the end of 2024, with significant differences across sectors (Chart 1.5, panel b). 
For example, insolvencies have decreased strongly in the transport sector of late while 
continuing to increase in industry (excluding construction). In particular, the 
automotive sector is struggling due to stagnating new car registrations, higher energy 
costs and the considerable spending needed to reduce the carbon footprint,12 while 
also becoming a focal point of current trade tensions. Challenges that already existed 
before the trade tensions culminated in an increasing number of downgrades in 2023 
and 2024, which clearly exceeded the number of upgrades (Chart 1.5, panel c). As 
net downgrades can be seen as an early indicator of future defaults, bankruptcies may 
be expected to increase further. At the same time, indicators of economic activity paint 
a mixed, but slightly more optimistic picture overall (Section 1.1). Most notably, the 
composite, manufacturing and services PMIs on expectations for future business 
activity in the next 12 months are signalling an expansion.

Trade frictions could significantly affect the resilience of euro area firms in key 
export-oriented industries. As of 2024, firms in the machinery and transport, 
manufactured goods and chemicals industries alone accounted for 84% of all exports 
and 72% of all imports (Chart 1.6, panel a). Abstracting from intra-EU trade, which 
accounts for the vast majority of goods traded, the United States is the most important 
export market for euro area firms in these three industries. China, on the other hand, is 
the most important trading partner in terms of goods imported. Consequently, 
escalating trade frictions with the United States could have twin repercussions for the 
profitability and resilience of euro area firms. The first stems from higher tariffs 
imposed on goods exported by euro area firms themselves. The second relates to 
stronger competition not only from China but also from other countries facing tariffs 
imposed by the United States. Goods from these countries might be rerouted to 
domestic and other markets, reducing profit margins and limiting the growth of capital 
and investment for euro area firms. Both effects depend, however, on trade elasticities 
with less severe implications for euro area companies producing more differentiated 
and less substitutable goods.

Intensifying trade frictions could worsen the outlook of firms, especially in the 
manufacturing sector. Euro area firms in the manufacturing, other industry and 
information sectors are most exposed to global trade conflicts, as they exhibit both 
large foreign market and large foreign input reliance (Chart 1.6, panel b and Special 
Feature B). Most notably, not only is manufacturing one of the biggest sectors in 
terms of gross value added, it has also experienced weak growth momentum. Given 
the already high levels of labour hoarding in industry, this could be a catalyst for rising 
lay-offs (Section 1.4). As European security parameters shift, however, governments 
are aiming to boost self-reliance in defence by creating fiscal space for future 
investments, preferably into European aerospace and defence manufacturing firms. 
Together with further fiscal stimulus packages, this could potentially offset losses from 
rising trade frictions, which is echoed by positive market sentiment following 
announcements of fiscal expansion in the euro area (Chapter 2.3). Unlocking 
additional investment capacity and stimulating growth dynamics through initiatives 
that aim to deepen the EU’s Single Market13 would help shore up euro area firms’ 
financial resilience and global competitiveness.14

Household vulnerabilities have eased slightly and are expected to remain low in 
the near future. The ECB’s composite indicator of household sector vulnerabilities 
suggests a continued decline in vulnerabilities over the past six months (Chart 1.7, 
panel a). Improvements in financing conditions, debt servicing capacity and, to a 
lesser extent, leverage contributed to this fall. Looking ahead, a further reduction in 
leverage and an increase in economic activity are expected to reduce the level of 
vulnerabilities even further from their current historical low. Conversely, the expected 
moderation in income growth may have a negative impact on overall vulnerabilities.

Robust growth in real disposable income has coincided with a saving ratio that 
remains elevated compared with pre-pandemic levels. As inflation approaches the 
ECB’s target of 2%, nominal disposable income growth is declining from its peak in 
March 2023 (Chart 1.7, panel b). The catch-up dynamics of nominal income to recoup 
lost purchasing power during the period of high inflation, caused by the infrequent 
adjustments in negotiated wages, are losing steam. Real disposable income is 
maintaining a healthy growth rate of around 2%. Despite a modest rise in 
consumption, the aggregate saving rate is reaching historical highs, aside from the 
exceptional surge during the pandemic. Households’ propensity to save more is likely 
influenced by precautionary motives amid an uncertain economic outlook and

heightened macroeconomic risks (Section 1.1). In such an environment, deep 
uncertainty and a possible tightening of financial conditions may induce households to 
cut back consumption, exacerbating the decline in the demand directed to firms 
associated with the trade tensions.

Household sentiment has plateaued following an earlier rebound, with 
expectations remaining clouded. Recent household sentiment, which aggregates a 
broad set of individual surveys, indicates stabilisation, albeit significantly below the 
long-term average (Chart 1.8, panel a). After the initial shock stemming from Russia’s 
full-scale invasion of Ukraine, there was a partial recovery in overall sentiment. 
However, a recent survey indicated a decline in the broader sentiment over the past 
six months and a more pronounced decline in households’ expectations for their 
economic situation over the coming year, likely accelerated by the rising trade 
uncertainty.

Upon first examination, the labour market appears robust, yet potential risks 
are beginning to emerge. Unemployment is historically low, and gains in other 
indicators, such as the labour participation rate, also point towards a relatively strong 
labour market (Chart 1.8, panel b). However, these indicators typically lag the 
business cycle, which can conceal underlying vulnerabilities. The European 
Commission’s labour hoarding indicator reflects the proportion of firms with a

deteriorating outlook that do not anticipate reducing their workforce.15 The longer 
labour hoarding persists above the non-recession average, the higher the risk to 
employment. At the aggregate level, and especially for the industrial sector, labour 
hoarding exceeds non-recession averages. Furthermore, labour hoarding in the 
industrial sector has been trending upwards since the start of 2022, albeit with a mild 
reversal in the recent past. Given that the industrial sector is particularly vulnerable to 
trade tensions and other structural challenges, it could become a catalyst for future 
increases in unemployment.

1.5 
Recovering real estate markets may face headwinds from 
elevated uncertainty

Falling borrowing costs have supported demand for mortgages, but 
construction activity has remained subdued. Following the decline in borrowing 
costs and the easing of lending standards in recent quarters, the demand for mortgage 
loans from households has increased of late (Chart 1.9, panel a). The main driver of 
this has been the fall in interest rates and to a lesser extent a slightly improved outlook 
for the residential real estate (RRE) market. RRE investment growth has continued to 
decline, however, even if the pace of that decline has moderated recently. In addition, 
forward-looking indicators of construction activity and construction prices signal 
subdued activity and expectations of higher prices, although these expectations are 
substantially less marked than at the peak of the cycle (Chart 1.9, panel b). This 
imbalance between supply and demand in the RRE market could potentially exert 
upward pressure on prices in the medium term.

The likelihood of a severe contraction in RRE prices is lower than at the peak of 
the cycle, but tail risks are still present. In the fourth quarter of 2024, RRE prices in 
the euro area increased by 4.2% year on year, following a decline of 1.1% in the 
equivalent quarter of the previous year. The situation differed markedly among 
countries. While some countries experienced robust price growth, a few still witnessed 
a contraction in prices, even though this was generally less pronounced than in the 
previous year (Chart 1.10, panel a). The recent correction in house prices has 
reduced estimates of overvaluation in most countries. Combined with improved 
financial conditions, this has led to a decrease in tail risks compared with the situation 
at the peak of the cycle in 2022 (Chart 1.10, panel b). That said, conditions vary 
greatly across the euro area, and some countries still face significant tail risks due to 
persistent overvaluation, low affordability and economic headwinds. A sharp increase 
in unemployment and associated income uncertainty in the event of a significant 
deterioration in the economic outlook could therefore lead to renewed downward 
pressure on house prices (Section 1.4).

Confidence in commercial real estate (CRE) markets has continued to 
strengthen in light of easing monetary policy, although downside risks remain. 
Sentiment indicators point towards a sharp drop in the share of investors reporting 
adverse credit conditions and a downturn in CRE markets. The number of investors 
who view CRE as expensive has also fallen. This suggests that the market downturn 
may be bottoming out and that the recent price correction may have reduced broader 
overvaluation in the market (Chart 1.11, panel a). While the easing of monetary policy 
will directly benefit CRE valuations via reduced discount factors, the recent downturn 
has also been driven by structural factors which affect demand for CRE. These include 
the shift towards remote working and falling demand for lower-quality offices.16 
Indeed, those office markets which have seen the sharpest decline in capital values 
since the COVID-19 pandemic have typically also seen the biggest increase in 
vacancy rates (Chart 1.11, panel b). These structural challenges are likely to persist, 
even in an environment of further monetary easing. Given their exposure to both 
international capital flows and local economic conditions, CRE markets are also highly 
vulnerable to the ongoing macroeconomic and geopolitical uncertainty. As previous 
editions of the Financial Stability Review have noted, the outlook for the lower-quality 
end of the market is particularly poor.

Despite signs of a gradual recovery in real estate markets, financial stability 
risks could still materialise and should be closely monitored. Real estate 
markets are highly sensitive to fluctuations in long-term interest rates and real 
economy developments. This implies that tail risks are still present, in light of current 
economic policy uncertainty and geopolitical risks. Given the size of banks’ residential 
mortgage portfolios (22.2% of total assets as of the third quarter of 2024), a significant 
rise in unemployment could pose financial stability risks where it results in a 
substantial increase in credit risk in this portfolio. While CRE markets may be even 
more vulnerable to a deterioration in the economic environment – given ongoing 
structural challenges and a particularly high sensitivity to real economy demand – 
these exposures are more contained and are unlikely to endanger the solvency of the 
euro area banking system as a whole (5% of total assets as of the third quarter of 
2024). However, these exposures are not evenly spread across the banking system, 
and stress could arise among the euro area’s most exposed banks. An adverse real 
estate market outcome could also be amplified where outflows from real estate funds 
result in (forced) procyclical selling (Chapter 4.2).

area equities have also seen unusually strong gains since 9 April. Driven by further 
positive news on easing trade tensions, in particular between the United States and 
China, US and euro area equities had mostly recovered the losses incurred after 2 
April by the cut-off date of this edition of the Financial Stability Review (Overview). In 
line with the way tariffs have dominated the financial headlines since the start of the 
year (Chart 2.1, panel b), these price swings illustrate the strong sensitivity of markets 
to both positive and negative tariff-related news.

The decline in value of US safe-haven assets during the April market sell-off 
may reflect higher liquidity needs or a broader reassessment of US assets. The 
April market sell-off was characterised by a breakdown in standard cross-asset 
correlations. While there were inflows into euro area sovereign bonds and German 
sovereign debt yields declined in a flight to safety, US Treasury yields increased, 
indicating a sell-off. This is unusual in times of market stress (Chart 2.1, panel c). In 
addition, the US dollar depreciated, including against the euro, despite an increasing 
interest rate differential. At the same time, currencies like the Japanese yen and the 
Swiss franc appreciated, supported by flight-to-safety flows. Gold prices temporarily 
dipped but have generally continued their long-term trend in registering new record 
highs (Box 2). There may be technical reasons for these unusual moves away from 
some traditional safe-haven assets. Investors needed to raise liquidity to meet fund 
redemptions or margin calls as market volatility rose (Chapter 4), and an unwinding of

asset swap or basis trade positions has contributed to the decline in US Treasuries.17 
Furthermore, the breakdown of standard correlations, the basis of risk management 
frameworks, drove the sell-offs, as a lack of diversification benefits led to higher 
portfolio losses. At the same time, these moves might also have reflected a more 
fundamental reassessment of US assets. The unpredictability of a broad range of US 
policies seems to have led investors to require higher risk premia on US assets. At the 
same time, it could also have shaken confidence in the US dollar as the global reserve 
currency and US sovereign bonds as safe-haven assets.

Implied equity volatility spiked in April but then fell again to levels that appear 
disconnected from the prevailing still-high uncertainty. Implied volatility in risky 
assets spiked after 2 April but then fell back to levels close to those seen when the 
previous edition of the Financial Stability Review was published (Chart 2.2, panel a). 
A similar pattern was observed across other risky asset classes, including corporate 
bonds, where implied volatility currently stands below its historical average. This swift 
retracement in market-implied volatility is notable, particularly in the context of 
persistently high levels of perceived economic policy uncertainty. By contrast, 
measures of realised volatility remain elevated. Moreover, futures for implied equity 
volatility suggest that price fluctuations are expected to remain moderate. This may

reflect market perceptions that downside risks, such as those stemming from global 
trade tensions, have diminished. However, such dynamics could also signal a degree 
of investor complacency, heightening the risk of abrupt volatility spikes should any 
adverse news emerge. In the euro area, market pricing, and hence volatility, remains 
highly sensitive to further tariff-related shocks across all euro area equity sectors, with 
markets considering the automotive, consumer products, IT, industrials, materials and 
financial sector to be the most exposed (Box A, Special Feature B).

Despite the increase in volatility, financial markets have continued to function 
in a rather orderly manner, with only a limited decline in euro area bond market 
liquidity. Volatility in euro area corporate bond markets has more or less increased in 
line with equity volatility (Chart 2.2, panel b). Liquidity conditions in euro area 
corporate bond markets have declined somewhat, the fall being driven mainly by a 
decrease in tightness (which measures the cost and price impact of executing a 
trade), but have stayed at levels which are about average (Chart 2.3, panel a). 
Liquidity conditions in euro area sovereign bond markets remained resilient during the 
sell-off in risky assets in April. They then deteriorated, before subsequently recovering 
to above-average levels (Chart 2.3, panel b). As volatility may surge again, coupled 
with the risk that market dynamics may turn disorderly in the event of further market 
stress, market liquidity indicators warrant further monitoring.

2.2 
The medium-term implications of tariffs might still 
challenge risky asset valuations

Equity valuations moved towards their long-term average but remain elevated 
and could be further challenged by a deteriorating economic outlook. Equity 
valuations have declined in recent months (Chart 2.4, panel a), particularly in the 
United States. As long as market functioning remains generally orderly, this decline 
reduces overvaluation concerns and is beneficial from a financial stability viewpoint. 
Valuations remain elevated, however, and might be further challenged. This could 
occur as the medium-term implications of higher tariffs for the global economic 
outlook, despite the recent easing of trade tensions, become clearer and market 
participants adjust their positions accordingly. Markets are pricing in some slowing of 
growth, but a global recession is not the baseline expectation.18 Decreasing earnings 
expectations would likely cause prices to fall further. Earnings momentum has been 
mostly negative for both the United States and Europe in recent weeks (Chart 2.4, 
panel b). Another trigger for further price corrections might be if tariffs have a greater 
impact on inflation than expected, resulting in a repricing of future interest rate paths.

Chart 2.4 
Valuations in equity markets might be further challenged if slowing global growth hits 
earnings expectations

a) Equity valuations 
b) Earnings revision indices

(left graph: Jan. 2021-May 2025, z-scores; right graph: 
1 Jan. 2000-13 May 2025, percentages) 
(1 Jan.-9 May 2025, index)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Citigroup via Bloomberg and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: left graph: z-scores are calculated based on data since January 2015. Lines show a composite indicator, which is a 
simple average of z-scores of five valuation indicators for the S&P 500 and the EURO STOXX index: price-to-book ratio, 12-month 
forward price/earnings ratio, long-term price/earnings ratio, PEG ratio and five-year excess CAPE yield. The latest observations are for 
13 May 2025. Right graph: equity risk premium is calculated as equity earnings yield minus ten-year sovereign bond yield. “Last FSR 
publication date” refers to 20 November 2024. Panel b: Citi Earnings Revision Index measures the weekly number of consensus 
earnings per share upgrades and downgrades (calculated as the number of upgrades minus the number of downgrades, divided by the 
total number of upgrades and downgrades). “Europe” refers to equity analyst FY2 earnings forecast changes for companies within the 
MSCI Europe ex UK Index; “US” refers to companies in the S&P 500 Index. FY2 is the next forecast year after the present year.

18 For example, in the March and April editions of the Bank of America’s Global Fund Manager Survey, a 
global recession triggered by an escalation in trade tensions was seen as the biggest tail risk, whereas in 
the May survey only 1% of respondents said a global recession was likely, down from 42% in April. Also, 
Bloomberg one-year recession probability forecasts remain at levels well below 50% for both the United 
States and the euro area.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

Persistently elevated concentration in US equity markets poses additional 
downside risks, as illustrated by shifts in AI sector valuations at the start of the 
year. Market concentration remains elevated, especially in US equity markets, despite 
declining somewhat (Chart 2.5, panel a). This remains a critical vulnerability, as 
idiosyncratic risks related to key sectors and technologies could easily result in 
market-wide adverse dynamics. The sharp decline in AI-related stock valuations after 
the release of the DeepSeek-R1 model in January underscores this vulnerability 
(Chart 2.5, panel b).19 The stock prices of the seven dominant US technology 
companies, known collectively as the “Magnificent 7”, fell by 16.5% between the 
release of the model and 2 April, which also affected euro area technology sector 
valuations and the wider market. Trade tensions then led to further price fluctuations. 
Additional tariffs imposed on key resources or companies in the AI sector might cause 
this vulnerability to translate into larger price losses.

Chart 2.5 
Market concentration and technological shifts in AI present a risk to asset valuations, 
as evidenced by the release of the DeepSeek-R1 model

a) Equity market concentration 
b) Market movements since the release of 
DeepSeek-R1

(2000-25, percentages) 
(27 Jan.-13 May 2025, percentages)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: the lines show the share of the top 5% of the EURO STOXX and S&P 500 Index constituents by market capitalisation, in 
the total market capitalisation of the index. The latest observations are for 13 May 2025. Panel b: China tech = Hang Seng TECH Index, 
EUR tech = EURO STOXX Technology Index, US = S&P 500, US tech = NASDAQ, Mag 7 = Bloomberg Magnificent 7 Total Return Index; 
yellow bars represent the change in index levels since the close on 24 January 2025, as more details became known about the 
DeepSeek-R1 model’s performance and cost effectiveness on the weekend thereafter. The “Magnificent 7” comprises the stocks of 
Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta, Microsoft, Nvidia and Tesla.

Corporate bond spreads seem low in light of the unprecedented levels of 
economic policy uncertainty. Corporate bond spreads widened during the 
tariff-related market downturn, but mostly recovered since then (Chart 2.6, panel a).20 
They appear disconnected from policy uncertainty levels, which reflects a change from

19 DeepSeek’s R1 model was released on 20 January, but its impact on market pricing only materialised on 
27 January, following the subsequent disclosure of additional information regarding the model’s 
performance and cost efficiency.

20 The overall resilience of US corporate bond spreads in light of historically elevated yields has primarily 
been driven by strong risk appetite, but also by a compositional shift towards better credit quality in new 
issuances; see the box entitled “Challenges to the resilience of US corporate bond spreads”, Economic 
Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2025.

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

the generally positive correlation between the two over the last few years (Chart 2.6, 
panel b). Increased uncertainty may lead firms to take a more cautious stance on 
corporate investments, which could be positive for debt holders. At the same time, 
general market sentiment could turn negative again with spillovers to corporate bond 
markets and slowing economic growth might lead to credit losses.

Chart 2.6 
Despite some short-lived widening, bond spreads remain low and are not in line with 
unprecedented economic policy uncertainty

a) Bond spreads 
b) Economic policy uncertainty and euro area 
corporate bond spreads

(31 May 2000-13 May 2025, percentage points) 
(1 Jan. 2013-13 May 2025; left-hand scale: index, right-hand scale: 
percentage points)

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Baker, Bloom and Davis* and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: distribution of option-adjusted spreads for Bloomberg bond indices for investment-grade (IG) and high-yield (HY) 
corporate bonds. EA stands for euro area. “Last FSR publication date” refers to 20 November 2024. Panel b: “Economic policy 
uncertainty index” is as set out in Baker, Bloom & Davis*; it is an aggregate of country-level uncertainty indices as available in Bloomberg. 
The yellow line is the option-adjusted spread of the Bloomberg Pan-European High Yield Index. 
*) Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S., “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, No 4, 
November 2016, pp. 1593-1636.

Pressure on corporate bond spreads might increase, as a substantial amount of 
maturing debt securities will need to be refinanced at a higher cost. Corporate 
bond issuers took advantage of falling rollover costs, which are the costs associated 
with issuing new debt to replace maturing debt, in the course of 2024 (Chart 2.7, 
panel a). Since the start of 2025, issuance has been significantly weaker than it was in 
the same period of the previous year. This might be due to uncertainty weighing on 
corporate business and investment activity, together with volatile market conditions. 
Although rollover costs had been falling, they have turned again and increased for 
lower-rated credit, in line with the widening of corporate spreads. With an 
exceptionally high share of outstanding debt rated at or below BBB set to mature in the 
next few years (Chart 2.7, panel b), corporates might need to refinance under less 
favourable conditions, which could reduce their debt servicing capacities, especially if 
they are not offset by higher growth. This could trigger a repricing of corporate debt 
and result in losses, especially for investment funds, which could further amplify 
adverse market movements (Chapter 4.2).

Financial Stability Review, May 2025 – Financial markets

Chart 2.7 
A substantial amount of maturing debt securities of lower-rated corporates will need to 
be refinanced at a higher cost

a) Rollover costs for euro area high-yield and 
investment-grade corporate bonds

b) Share of outstanding euro area corporate 
bonds maturing over the next two years

(Jan. 2019-May 2025; left-hand scale: percentage points, 
right-hand scale: € billions)

Sources: Dealogic, a service of ION Analytics, Bloomberg Finance L.P., ICE and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Panel a: face value-weighted average difference between yield to worst and coupon rate of individual bonds in the ICE BofA Euro 
Corporate Index and ICE BofA Euro High Yield Index. Average of daily data per month. HY stands for high-yield; IG stands for 
investment-grade. May 2025 includes data until 13 May. Panel b: outstanding bonds broken down by rating.

Box 2 
 
What does the record price of gold tell us about risk perceptions in financial markets?

Prepared by Maurizio Michael Habib, Oscar Schwartz Blicke, Emilio Siciliano and Jonas Wendelborn

Gold prices have seen an unprecedented surge since 2023, reaching a series of all-time 
highs. Gold has a long history as a store of value. Given its limited industrial use, demand for gold 
comes traditionally from retail customers (e.g. for jewellery), although it is also employed as an 
investment asset and used by central banks as a reserve asset.21 From an investment perspective, 
gold differs from other asset classes. Unlike most bonds and equities, it does not provide cash flow.22 
Instead, its appeal reflects two unique features, particularly in times of high uncertainty. First, it is not 
a liability of any counterparty and thus carries no default risk. Second, given its limited and relatively 
inelastic supply, it retains its intrinsic value and cannot be debased. Accordingly, gold is often seen as 
a portfolio diversifier, a hedge against inflation and US dollar depreciation, and a safe haven23 in 
times of severe financial market or geopolitical stress.24 Against this backdrop, this box analyses

gold’s performance during episodes of stress as well as developments in gold derivatives markets, 
the aim being to assess risk perceptions and gauge the implications for financial stability.

Chart A 
Gold prices have surged as gold acts as a hedge against geopolitical risks and policy uncertainty

Gold generally offers a safe haven in times of stress, particularly during episodes of high 
geopolitical risk or policy uncertainty. A comparison of average returns from global equities, gold, 
US Treasuries and the US dollar over the last three decades shows that gold performs well during 
episodes of stress (Chart A, panel a). Gold prices tend to rise during episodes of elevated 
geopolitical risk while stock and bond prices tend to fall. For example, over the past three years 
central banks, especially those from emerging market economies, have increasingly purchased gold, 
most likely to insulate themselves from the effects of geopolitical tensions or potential sanctions 
(Chart A, panel b).25 During periods of greater economic policy uncertainty, gold outperforms 
equities and the US dollar, whereas bond prices generally decrease. Also, in times of extreme stock 
market volatility, gold provides a relatively good hedge against abruptly falling stocks.26 Finally, in 
extreme cases, when investors face elevated geopolitical risks, stock market volatility and policy 
uncertainty at the same time (such as during the 9/11 terror attacks, the onset of the COVID-19 
pandemic or the Russian invasion of Ukraine), gold prices tend to rise alongside the value of the US

dollar, while stock and bond prices decline markedly. Overall, this confirms that gold is a safe haven 
during times of stress in financial markets or elevated geopolitical or policy uncertainty.

Recent developments in gold futures markets such as COMEX, particularly in futures 
contracts with physical delivery, confirm the close correlation between elevated policy 
uncertainty and the price of gold.27 Policy uncertainty, especially that related to global trade 
arrangements, has spiked since the US presidential election of November 2024 (Chart B, panel a). 
According to surveys conducted in February and March 2025, 58% of asset managers would expect 
gold to be the best-performing asset class in a full-blown trade war scenario.28 Against this backdrop, 
COMEX vaults saw significant increases in gold inventories, while the number of gold futures 
contracts noticed for delivery has been historically high in 2025, January 2025 delivery notices being 
the highest since July 2007. (Chart B, panel a). The preference shown by COMEX participants 
towards acquiring physical gold through the futures market indicates that investors are favouring long 
positions in physical gold over non-physically settled contracts. These long positions are likely to 
benefit from gold’s reputation as a safe haven during a period of high economic and trade policy 
uncertainty.

Trade policy uncertainty and increased demand for gold has led to higher gold borrowing 
costs and gold futures prices. Prior to the US tariff announcement on 2 April this year, worries 
about gold being subject to sweeping import tariffs and higher prices on the futures exchange in New 
York than in the cash market in London reportedly led to gold held in London being shipped to New 
York.29 As a result, the costs of borrowing and sourcing gold in the London market increased.30 
Sudden market stress31 and disruptions to sourcing, shipping and delivering physical gold in 
derivatives contracts raise the question of whether counterparties obliged to deliver physical gold 
could be at risk of incurring increased margin calls and suffering losses. This has been seen in other 
non-energy commodity markets in the past.32

Euro area investors are exposed to gold through derivatives, pointing to large foreign 
counterparty exposures. In the euro area, gross notional exposures to gold derivatives amounted to 
€1 trillion in March 2025, an increase of 58% since November 2024.33 A significant share of these 
derivatives contracts are traded over-the-counter (OTC) and are not centrally cleared. Approximately 
48% of gold derivatives contracts have a bank counterparty (Chart B, panel b). The majority of euro 
area banks’ gold derivative exposures are with non-euro area domiciled counterparties, suggesting 
some exposure to external shocks in the gold market. By contrast, exposures in the euro area to gold

31 Stress could be exacerbated by manipulation in commodity markets, leading to corners, squeezes and 
unanticipated price disruptions in commodity markets. For a theoretical explanation, see Pirrong, C., 
“The economics of commodity market manipulation: a survey”, Journal of Commodity Markets, Vol. 5, 
March 2017, pp. 1-17.

Chart B 
Recent developments in the COMEX market confirm the correlation between gold prices and 
uncertainty, as investors increase their demand for physical gold through the derivatives market

Gold markets appear to partly reflect elevated geopolitical risk and substantial economic 
policy uncertainty, with tail scenarios potentially having adverse effects on financial stability. 
While gold prices are driven by many factors, investors showed high demand for gold as a safe-haven 
asset and, at the beginning of 2025, a notable preference for gold futures contracts to be settled 
physically. These dynamics hint at investors’ expectations that geopolitical risks and policy 
uncertainty could remain elevated or even intensify in the foreseeable future. Should extreme events 
materialise, there could be adverse effects on financial stability arising from gold markets. This could 
occur even though the aggregate exposure of the euro area financial sector appears limited 
compared with other asset classes, given that commodity markets exhibit a number of 
vulnerabilities.34 Such vulnerabilities have arisen because commodity markets tend to be 
concentrated among a few large firms, often involve leverage and have a high degree of opacity 
deriving from the use of OTC derivatives. Margin calls and the unwinding of leveraged positions could 
lead to liquidity stress among market participants, potentially propagating the shock through the wider 
financial system. Additionally, disruptions in the physical gold market could increase the risk of a 
squeeze. In this case, market participants could be subject to significant margin calls and/or have

trouble sourcing and transporting appropriate physical gold for delivery in derivatives contracts, 
leaving themselves exposed to potentially large losses.

The more positive stance taken by markets on the euro area might continue as 
global investment portfolios might move away from their previously strong US 
overweight. Markets started the year by shifting to a more positive stance on the euro 
area, driven by diverging trends in economic outlook, as indicated by the purchasing 
managers’ indices (PMIs) for both regions (Chart 2.8, panel a). Until March, growth 
sentiment for the euro area had been gradually improving, albeit from much lower 
levels than those in the United States, where sentiment declined. In addition, while 
sentiment for the euro area deteriorated in response to the 2 April tariff 
announcement, the impact of the announcement has so far been smaller on the euro 
area than on the United States. This is reflected in the outperformance of euro area 
equities since the start of the year and slightly smaller aggregate losses in April. In 
addition, there are initial indications of a rotation out of US markets and into euro area 
markets (Overview and Section 4.2).

Before the tariff shock, markets were optimistic that the planned fiscal 
expansion in the euro area would improve its economic outlook. 
Announcements of a major expansion in defence and infrastructure spending, along 
with the proposed reform of the German “debt brake”, led to an increase in Bund yields 
(Chart 2.8, panel b). Corroborated by a model-based decomposition and by market 
intelligence, this was primarily due to the positive impact on growth the fiscal 
expansion is expected to have for the German economy and the euro area economy 
as a whole. In line with the limited increase in inflation swap rates – which fully 
reversed their initial rise over subsequent weeks – the decomposition also suggests 
that markets appear less concerned about potential inflationary pressures stemming 
from the announced fiscal expansion.35 The initial increase in sovereign bond yields 
has fully reversed, driven by the tariff-related market turmoil and further policy rate 
cuts. However, market intelligence and surveys indicate that a large share of market 
participants remain hopeful that the longer-term growth impact of the fiscal expansion 
will be substantial, despite near-term tariff-related headwinds.36 A reassessment of 
this sentiment would likely trigger revaluations.

The planned fiscal expansion could harm sovereign debt sustainability and 
challenge markets’ optimistic views on sovereign credit risk. Euro area spreads 
remained stable despite the initial increase in sovereign bond yields after the planned 
fiscal expansion was announced. Risks to spreads are, however, skewed to the 
upside. A simple model suggests that raising defence spending to 2.5% of GDP or 
higher could lead to uneven increases in bond yields across the euro area (Chart 2.9, 
panel a), some of which might already be priced in. This is due to differing current 
levels of defence spending (Chapter 1.2) and to varying sensitivities to changes in 
deficits across countries. At the same time, most of the more highly indebted countries 
have not so far pledged major increases to their defence spending and markets have 
shown limited sensitivity to fiscal deficits in recent years.37 This trend could reverse if 
fiscal consolidation efforts stutter and growth expectations are disappointed. In 
addition, the fiscal expansion taking place alongside the ongoing normalisation of the 
ECB’s balance sheet will result in a larger amount of net bond supply, which might also 
affect euro area sovereign bond spreads. Higher issuance by less-indebted countries 
could lead to higher yields overall and challenge more-indebted countries, especially if

35 The decomposition indicates that the real rate component was the main driver behind this rise in euro 
area risk-free rates and sovereign bond yields in response to Germany’s fiscal event. It also suggests 
that it was the inflation risk premium rather than genuine inflation expectations that helped to push up 
swap rates and bond yields, potentially reflecting the high degree of uncertainty associated with the fiscal 
package. The real rate is found by subtracting the inflation-linked swap rate from the nominal overnight 
index swap (OIS) rate. The ten-year spot OIS rate is broken down into nominal expected rates and term 
premia using two affine term structure models, including one using survey data and a lower bound model 
using survey data, following Geiger, F. and Schupp. F, “With a little help from my friends: Survey-based 
derivation of euro area short rate expectations at the effective lower bound”, Discussion Papers, No 
27/2018, Deutsche Bundesbank, 2018. The real counterpart is obtained by subtracting expected inflation 
and inflation risk premia from the ten-year ILS rate decomposition, as detailed in the box entitled 
“Decomposing market-based measures of inflation compensation into inflation expectations and risk 
premia”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2021.

37 Further results from the model indicate that since 2020 yield sensitivities to changes in debt-to-GDP 
ratios have been significantly lower than in the preceding five-year period (2015-19). Model results 
illustrate the variability across countries; the estimated size of the yield increases is sensitive to model 
specifications.

spreads widen. That said, sovereign bonds might be particularly attractive in times of 
increased uncertainty and there have been capital inflows into the euro area which 
could support absorption capacity. Shifts in global portfolio flows could pose an 
additional challenge for euro area bond markets, as Japanese bond yields have 
significantly increased since the previous edition of the Financial Stability Review was 
published. This could potentially trigger repatriation flows by Japanese investors, who 
are important players in euro area bond markets.38 Despite these risks, market 
sentiment in sovereign bond markets has generally been broadly optimistic. This is 
reflected in market-implied ratings which continue to be significantly better than actual 
sovereign ratings, especially for more-indebted countries (Chart 2.9, panel b).

38 Yield differentials between the euro area and Japan remain high and FX hedging costs, as indicated by 
volatility in the EUR/JPY exchange rate, have been stable or declining. These provide mitigating factors, 
but at some point absolute yield levels may become an increasingly relevant consideration for Japanese 
investors.

3.1 
Bank profitability remains solid but faces headwinds

experiencing a sharp fall after the initial US tariff announcement followed by a 
recovery upon the news on a 90-day tariff pause for most countries and, subsequently, 
on easing trade tensions, in particular between the United States and China. Looking 
at year-to-date changes in price-to-book ratios, banks with higher expected 
profitability have been outperforming their peers since the beginning of 2025 
(Chart 3.1, panel a, right graph). Over a longer time horizon, higher deposit franchise 
values are also associated with higher market valuations (Box 3). Notwithstanding the 
increased volatility, the valuation gap between US and euro area banks has narrowed 
significantly since the beginning of 2025, due to a general shift in sentiment towards 
euro area banks and better profitability from euro area banks as of 2024 (Chart 3.1, 
panel b). It is also due to a decline in US banks’ market valuations that had started 
even before the US tariff announcement.

Bank profitability stabilised in 2024, albeit at still-high levels, as net interest 
income growth had stalled due to falling interest rates. Banks’ trailing return on 
equity (ROE) continued to hover at around 9.5% during 2024, a level it first reached in 
the third quarter of 2023. Growth in net interest income made a positive contribution to 
the change in ROE on an annual basis, but it stalled in the second half of 2024 due to 
a combination of slightly tighter margins and subdued volume growth. As a result, 
growth in operating income has increasingly been driven by non-interest income in 
recent quarters. The impact of higher revenues was offset by moderate increases in 
operating expenses and equity as well as a stronger negative impact from other items

(Chart 3.2, panel a). The dispersion in bank profitability has remained wide, with a 
quarter of banks showing an ROE of above 14% and another quarter of banks 
recording less than 6% (Chart 3.2, panel b, left graph). The main differentiating factor 
is that the top quartile of banks entered the hiking cycle with operating income that was 
already higher and these banks increased their revenues (notably net interest income) 
at a much faster pace between 2021 and 2024 than the lowest quartile of banks. This 
is partly due to differing sensitivities to the rate cycle, as many banks in the lowest 
ROE quartile are based in countries where fixed-rate loans are prevalent and this 
group of banks also includes some specialised, not-for-profit institutions. To a lesser 
extent, differing trends in cost efficiency and the cost of risk also contributed to the 
divergence (Chart 3.2, panel b, right graph).

Revenue growth is expected to slow in 2025, as net interest income is set to 
decline. Banks’ loan-deposit spreads on new business have continued to decline 
(Chart 3.3, panel a), as a significant share of their loan books is tracking falling 
short-term rates. This is expected to gradually feed through to net interest margins on 
outstanding amounts and thus put pressure on revenue growth, in particular for banks 
with a larger share of floating-rate loans. At the same time, growth in fee and 
commission income picked up in 2024, partly driven by asset/wealth management 
activities (Chart 3.3, panel b). This item tends to be more volatile than items related to 
commercial banking activities (e.g. payment services, loans and guarantees) and

could be vulnerable to adverse market shocks affecting investment fund flows 
(Section 4.2).

Cost control will remain important for offsetting slower revenue growth, but 
rising cybersecurity challenges require investment. However, banks’ operating 
expenses grew at a faster pace over the course of 2024, when adjusted for 
contributions to deposit guarantee schemes and resolution funds, driven mainly by 
payroll costs (Chart 3.3, panel c). Furthermore, banks face upward pressure on costs 
due to the increasing need to invest in IT and cybersecurity, given that cyber threats 
continue to pose substantial risks to financial institutions amid heightened geopolitical 
uncertainty (Box 1). Almost half of significant cybersecurity incidents reported by 
financial institutions in the EU from January 2023 to June 2024 concerned banks,39 
and the number of significant cyber incidents affecting banks supervised by the ECB 
rose to a new high in 2024. Survey data reveal that cybersecurity remains the primary 
concern among the chief risk officers of global banks, with 75% of them agreeing it is 
the main risk over the next 12 months, slightly up from 73% a year earlier.40

Banks’ profitability is expected to fall slightly in 2025, driven by a decline in net 
interest income and, to a lesser extent, by an increase in the cost of risk. For a 
sample of listed banks, private sector analysts project that aggregate ROE will decline

slightly in 2025 before stabilising in 2026 (Chart 3.4, panel a). For the median listed 
bank, a moderate decline in net interest income is forecast for 2025, but banks with a 
higher share of floating-rate loans are expected to see their net interest income fall 
more significantly (Chart 3.4, panel b). The negative effect of lower rates on margins 
could be offset, at least in part, by structural hedging, a gradual pick-up in bank lending 
flows in home markets and, in some cases, continued growth in higher-margin lending 
activities outside the euro area. Differences in rate sensitivity across banks are also 
apparent in the wide range of estimated declines in net interest income under the 
scenario of a downward shift in the yield curve.41 As at the end of 2024, the median 
bank would see its net interest income fall by 11% relative to the baseline under such 
a scenario, but there is a wide dispersion across banks, with an interquartile range of 
between -6% and -16%. Finally, in spite of a still weak macroeconomic outlook for 
2025, analysts expect only a slight increase in banks’ cost of risk in 2025 and a 
stabilisation in 2026 (Chart 3.4, panel c). That said, banks’ provisioning needs may 
increase further amid increased downside risks to banks’ credit risk outlook 
(Section 3.2)

Banks’ deposit franchises can act as a stabilising force in the banking system by supporting 
profitability and containing interest rate risk. The value of a bank’s deposit franchise is defined as 
the long-term present value of its earnings from attracting and retaining low-cost and stable deposit 
funding, minus any operating expenses incurred (e.g. due to operating branches and marketing 
expenses). In providing steady, low-cost funding, strong deposit franchises are a key source of bank 
profitability and, as such, have contributed to the recent surge in profitability. They also help banks to 
manage interest rate risk in a volatile interest rate environment, as changes in the economic value of 
a bank’s deposit franchise can offset valuation changes in long-term fixed-rate assets. High deposit 
franchise values may also reduce banks’ risk-taking incentives and moral hazard by representing an 
economic asset that banks aim to protect, potentially resulting in higher market valuations.42

The interest rate environment is the key determinant of the deposit franchise value.43 
Customers deposit cash with banks as they provide safety, liquidity and access to cashless payments 
(the “deposit franchise”). Their deposits are remunerated at rates that are both low and relatively 
insensitive to market interest rates. This allows banks to earn a spread between market rates and 
deposit rates that generally increases with the market rate. Banks’ operating expenses do not vary 
much over time and are therefore also insensitive to interest rates. This means that the value of a 
bank’s deposit franchise is higher when interest rates are high. During the low-for-long interest rate 
environment, the deposit franchise was a liability in economic terms for virtually all euro area banks 
(Chart A, panel a) as they were unable to generate a spread income in excess of their operating 
expenses.44 The exit from the low interest rate environment pushed the deposit franchise value back 
into positive territory, turning it into an economic asset. The negative modified duration of the deposit 
franchise value protected banks from the interest rate risk stemming from unrealised losses on 
long-term fixed-rate assets. Across the euro area, positive deposit franchise values have been 
observed when long-term interest rates have exceeded 1.8%.

44 While deposit spread income, in isolation, consequently did not contribute positively to bank earnings, the 
deposit franchise may still have generated indirect value, e.g. through customer relations providing 
opportunities for selling services, thus boosting fee income.

Higher market concentration, market power and cost efficiency are associated with higher 
deposit franchise values. Banks in countries with more concentrated banking sectors (Greece and 
Cyprus) tend to have higher deposit franchise values than those in less concentrated markets 
(Germany, France and Austria) (Chart A, panel b). Higher market concentration is often associated 
with a lower pass-through of interest rate changes to deposit rates45 which is linked to the prevailing 
level of competition for deposits46. The relationship is also visible at the individual bank level, as 
banks with larger market shares, and hence greater market power, have higher deposit franchise 
values (Chart A, panel c). Another factor that contributes to the differences in banks’ deposit 
franchise values is cost efficiency. For example, banks with lower unit operating expenses require a 
lower deposit spread income to achieve a positive deposit franchise value.

Banks with higher deposit franchise values are more attractive to investors. Higher deposit 
franchise values are also associated with higher market valuations, across both time and banks. 
Since 2008 banks’ average deposit franchise values and average price-to-book ratios have followed 
similar patterns (Chart B, panel a). This positive relationship also holds at the cross-sectional level, 
as banks with higher deposit franchise values receive higher valuations from investors (Chart B,

45 The deposit franchise value thus also partly reflects varying degrees of monetary policy transmission to 
deposits across euro area countries.

panel b). This is relevant in terms of financial stability, as weak valuations can impede the ability of 
banks to raise capital and provide credit to the real economy.

The value of euro area banks’ deposit franchises has important implications for financial 
stability in the euro area. Banks provide services to customers in the form of security, short-term 
liquidity and cashless payment systems. In return, as the only deposit-taking institutions in a sector 
with high barriers to entry, they benefit from the incomplete pass-through of interest rate changes to 
deposit funding costs and low customer deposit remuneration. In this context, a sustainable and 
profitable deposit franchise acts as a stabilising force in the banking system. This business model 
does, however, entail the risk of deposit runs in the event of a confidence shock.47 Moreover, greater 
competition in the deposit market or greater household participation in financial markets, instead of 
placing savings with banks directly, could put pressure on deposit franchise values. Understanding 
the differences and dynamics of the deposit franchise value is important for the assessment of banks’ 
interest rate risk exposures and market valuations.

47 The deposit franchise value is a function of the stickiness of deposits, which is affected by several factors, 
including digitalisation. In fact, digital banking can reduce the stickiness of deposits and influence the 
deposit franchise value of deposits, which may in turn have an impact on the stability of the banking 
sector. For further details on this topic, see Koont, N., Santos, T. and Zingales, L., “Destabilizing Digital 
‘Bank Walks’”, Working Paper Series, No 32601, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2024. 
For information on digital banking in the euro area, see the box entitled “Digital banking: how new bank 
business models are disrupting traditional banks” in this edition of the Financial Stability Review.

3.2 
Asset quality deterioration has remained contained, but 
credit risk and provisioning needs are likely to increase

As a whole, euro area banks’ asset quality remains robust, albeit with some 
divergence at the country level. The aggregate non-performing loan (NPL) ratio of 
euro area banks remains close to its historical low, despite a marginal increase in 
2024, while the Stage 2 ratio is broadly unchanged from a year earlier (Chart 3.5, 
panel a). Net NPL flows were positive over 2024 as a whole, driven mostly by NPLs in 
the corporate loan book, although they turned negative in the last quarter of 2024 for 
the first time since the end of 2022 (Chart 3.5, panel b). However, a benign asset 
quality picture overall masks diverging trends at the country level, as banks located in 
some euro area countries where NPL ratios used to be low saw an increase in their 
NPL stocks in 2024 (Chart 3.5, panel c). By contrast, countries which had 
experienced a significant increase in NPL ratios during the sovereign debt crisis saw 
further declines in NPL stocks in 2024, driven by the continued disposal of long-dated 
NPLs.

Pockets of slow deterioration in asset quality remain, however, with a further 
(albeit decelerating) deterioration evident in commercial real estate (CRE) 
lending. The aggregate CRE NPL ratio increased marginally in 2024, with the pace of 
deterioration slowing compared with a year earlier, partly reflecting diverging trends by 
borrower location (Chart 3.6, panel a). In particular, the CRE NPL ratio for US 
exposures continued to rise significantly, up by nearly 4 percentage points since the

end of 2023. CRE NPLs on US exposures accounted for 18% of the total at the end of 
2024, but these continue to be largely concentrated in a few, mostly German, banks. 
Exposures to euro area CRE borrowers are performing significantly better, with only 
contained deterioration or even improvements recorded over the course of 2024 
(Section 1.5).

The quality of SME and consumer loans has also deteriorated slightly. The 
aggregate SME NPL ratio continued to rise gradually for much of 2024, before 
declining slightly in the last quarter. By contrast, early arrears picked up again in the 
second half of 2024, although their share in total SME loans remained relatively 
contained (Chart 3.6, panel b). In the household segment, the quality of consumer 
loans also showed small signs of deterioration as early arrears picked up in the fourth 
quarter of 2024, although the NPL ratio remained broadly stable (Chart 3.6, panel c). 
Due to their higher cyclical sensitivity, banks face the prospect of a further decline in 
the credit quality of their SME and consumer loans portfolios amid a weakening 
economic outlook.

Rising global trade tensions could also add to credit risk in the non-financial 
sector. Firm profitability may be negatively affected by the implementation of tariffs in 
some manufacturing segments which are highly exposed to extra-EU trade, such as 
carmaking and machinery (Chart 3.7, panel a). The broader and longer-lasting 
macroeconomic effects of trade policy uncertainty could also lead to a deterioration of 
bank asset quality, albeit with stronger impacts for banks with higher exposures to 
sectors relying on extra-EU trade (Special Feature B). In an adverse scenario, where 
escalating trade tensions could also lead to lay-offs in affected sectors, the negative 
impact on asset quality could extend to parts of banks’ household loan portfolios.

Provisioning costs remain subdued but may rise again as new NPLs age and 
guarantees are phased out. As stated in the November 2024 edition of the Financial 
Stability Review, banks’ NPL coverage ratios for corporate loans have declined over 
the last few years, driven by the disposal of legacy NPLs with higher coverage, the 
inflow of new NPLs with lower coverage and the use of substantial public credit 
guarantees during the pandemic. However, this reduction in coverage ratios may start 
to reverse in 2025 as two factors that contributed to this decline fade away. First, new 
NPLs will likely require higher provisions as they age, with the average provision 
coverage on NPLs rising from 44% when they are less than a year old to 68% for loans 
that are more than two years old (as of end-2024). This will mostly affect countries 
which have seen NPL inflows in recent years and where this dynamic has been more 
prevalent (Chart 3.7, panel b). Second, the share of government-guaranteed loans 
stock will continue to decrease in 2025, with 42% estimated to have already left the 
portfolio since the end of 2022. Beyond these structural factors, banks may see some 
increase in provisioning costs due to the worsening growth outlook for 2025 
(Section 1.1), which could lead to higher expected loss estimates under the IFRS 9 
framework.

Bank bond yields have declined over the past year, but spreads have been 
volatile recently. Bank bond yields have fallen considerably, reaching their lowest 
levels since the onset of the last round of monetary policy tightening. Much of this 
decline had already occurred before policy rates started to fall, as markets priced in 
policy cuts earlier (Chart 3.8, panel a). Bank bond yields have, however, been volatile 
recently, affected by fluctuations in both the underlying risk-free rate and bond 
spreads since the announcement of trade tariffs by the US Administration on 2 April. 
Credit spreads for more junior instruments have risen notably and contributed to an 
increase in the average secondary market yield. By contrast, spreads on covered 
bonds have narrowed, with market participants favouring these assets in a flight to 
safety (Chart 3.8, panel b). In response, some banks delayed primary market bond 
issuances of more junior instruments, timing them with the return of more favourable 
market conditions after temporary tariff pauses had been announced (Chart 3.8, 
panel c).

Deposit rates have also declined, but differences in funding conditions across 
banks persist. Since the ECB’s first policy rate cut in June 2024, euro area banks 
have substantially reduced interest rates on term deposits. Meanwhile, interest rates 
on shorter-maturity accounts, such as overnight deposits and deposits redeemable at 
notice, have changed little from their peak. This is, however, consistent with the more 
muted pass-through of rate increases during the hiking cycle (Chart 3.9, panel a). 
Across banks, differences in deposit rates persist and may be partly explained by

differences in net stable funding ratios (NSFRs) (Chart 3.9, panel b). As retail 
deposits represent stable funding, a lower share of deposit financing decreases 
banks’ NSFRs but might also allow them to pay higher deposit rates, depending on 
their business model. However, there could also be a more structural relationship 
between funding liquidity and deposit rates: those banks with ample funding liquidity 
might not feel the same pressure to bid up for deposits as those with lower NSFRs.

Deposit growth has contributed to ample funding liquidity, but the composition 
of deposits is shifting towards demand accounts. Deposit growth has been 
positive since the beginning of the easing cycle, supported most by inflows into 
overnight deposits. This marks a reversal in the dynamics observed over the 
tightening cycle until April 2024, when deposit growth was driven by term deposits and 
shifts tended to be away from overnight deposits towards better-remunerated 
accounts (Chart 3.9, panel c). The renewed growth in overnight deposits, alongside 
subdued growth in term deposits, reflects lower demand for savings accounts due to 
the narrowing gap between term and overnight deposit rates (Chart 3.9, panel a). 
Moreover, it signals a change in preferences for more liquid assets, as the dynamics 
reversed even when term deposit rates were still at high levels and this benefits banks 
by shifting the funding composition towards the cheapest source of funding. Over 
recent years, depositor preferences have also evolved through the digitalisation of 
financial services and the increasing presence of online banks (Box 4).

Despite the recent market turmoil, there have not been any signs of funding 
stress. While the contractual maturity of banks’ deposit funding shortened with the 
changing composition, deposit data at weekly frequency have not shown any 
evidence of increased funding stress recently. In the same vein, wholesale funding 
from money markets has been stable as well. Although some euro area banks have 
strong international linkages through their activities as intermediators of US dollar 
liquidity via repo and FX swap markets48, market functioning has been orderly. Neither 
have there been any signs of impaired access to foreign currency funding via repo and 
FX swap markets, despite the volatility seen in other market segments.

The funding structure of digital banks is heavily skewed towards small retail deposits. About 
80% of total digital bank funding is sourced from retail depositors. The absence of physical branches 
reduces local anchoring, leading to an unusually large share of cross-border deposits (Chart A, 
panel a). Over 90% of these retail deposits are covered by deposit guarantee schemes. The average 
size of these deposits is smaller than at traditional banks, reflecting the low share of customers who 
use digital banks for their primary bank account. Corporate deposits and wholesale funding play a 
much less significant role for digital banks. While such a funding structure may be more stable than 
that of traditional banks, digital banks’ lack of diversified funding and reliance solely on online 
distribution channels increase their vulnerability to bank runs.

The asset composition of digital banks reveals two main types of business model (Chart A, 
panel b). Many digital banks have adopted the business model of a lender, transforming retail 
deposits collected online into loans which are often also provided through digital channels. However, 
the lending franchises of these banks often specialise in consumer, mortgage or non-financial 
corporate loans, with only a few digital banks managing diversified loan portfolios. Digital subsidiaries 
place a sizeable part of their assets with credit institutions within their own banking group. The second 
common business model is similar to that of a money market fund. Digital banks of this type do not 
have material lending businesses; instead, they invest deposits in high-quality liquid assets, primarily

49 The identification methodology integrates diverse data sources, including supervisory reporting, the ECB 
Register of Institutions and Affiliates Database (RIAD) and Orbis, to establish a ranking system that 
evaluates banks against a theoretical digital bank profile. Additional manual checks are then carried out 
to accurately identify digital-only banks. Although many euro area banks only collect deposits through 
online channels, not all of them meet the criteria identifying them as an online bank. For example, banks 
affiliated with the automobile industry are excluded from the sample because their primary focus is 
vehicle financing rather than a broad range of banking services.

central bank reserves. All digital banks operate with unusually high liquidity buffers, possibly reflecting 
their preparedness for online runs and their reliance on more price-sensitive digital depositors. 
However, this may also be because the limited lending franchises of digital banks prevent them from 
deploying funds more productively.

Digital banks remain less profitable than traditional banks due to their higher cost of deposits 
and high fixed expenses. Digital banks have proven to be less profitable than traditional banks and 
the dispersion of their profitability has been very wide (Chart B, panel a). Digital banks have faced a 
steep increase in their cost of deposits, reflecting higher interest rate pass-through (Chart B, 
panel b). This has been particularly pronounced for independent banks, given their drive to expand 
market share and a customer base that is generally more price-sensitive than that of traditional 
banks.50 At the same time, their currently limited scale, relatively high fixed IT costs and substantial 
marketing expenses constrain their ability to achieve a similar level of profitability to that of traditional

banks.51 Digital banks also operate with significantly higher capital ratios, which mechanically 
reduces returns on equity.

The continued growth of digital banks could bring benefits for customers but, by displacing 
incumbents, may also threaten financial stability. Digital banks have been successful at 
establishing a foothold in some banking services but remain relatively small players with limited 
product offerings. However, investors in digital banks seem to value their equity very highly (Chart B, 
panel c). Such valuations can only be justified if, in the future, digital banks achieved the kind of scale 
that would allow them to operate more efficiently. This would require them to acquire a substantial 
share of the euro area banking market. The further growth of digital banks might be good for 
consumers, who would benefit from more competition, and could push incumbents towards improving 
their service offer. It may, however, also become a threat to financial stability if the business models of 
traditional banks are disrupted and incumbents rapidly lose the deposit franchise that provides stable 
funding, which in turn backs their lending to the real economy. Furthermore, it could push traditional 
banks into taking on additional risks to compensate for higher funding costs. As many digital banks 
are based in small countries and have numerous non-exclusive customers who are more likely to

move their deposits in response to idiosyncratic shocks, their expansion may create a new channel 
for cross-border spillovers as long as deposit insurance remains at the national level. Should digital 
customers lose trust in a digital bank or in its home country, they could easily transfer their funds 
elsewhere, leading to financial fragmentation and potentially increased spillover risks from banks to 
sovereigns.

Liquidity buffers remain comfortable, while the composition of euro area banks’ 
liquid assets has been moving away from cash and towards debt securities. 
The total stock of banks’ high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) has been fairly stable, with 
the aggregate liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) standing at 159%, substantially above the 
minimum requirements and pre-pandemic levels. However, the composition of HQLA 
has changed with the reduction of the ECB’s balance sheet. Excess reserves have 
declined, as banks have used funds to meet TLTRO redemptions, and have been 
replaced by sovereign bond holdings. The share of sovereign bonds in HQLA has 
nearly doubled since the third quarter of 2022 as a result (Chart 3.10, panel a). 
Despite this shift, the HQLA composition is still skewed towards cash compared with 
pre-pandemic levels, although this is likely to change with the ongoing normalisation of 
the ECB’s balance sheet and increased public financing needs (Chapter 1).

Banks’ sovereign bond portfolios have become larger, but more diversified. 
While home bias persists, banks have diversified sovereign bond holdings by 
purchasing non-domestic bonds. This limits concerns about the sovereign-bank 
nexus. Nonetheless, larger sovereign bond portfolios leave banks more exposed to 
adverse market movements. Any resulting valuation losses can affect banks’ LCRs, 
since eligible securities are generally marked-to-market for the purpose of LCR 
calculations. In a similar vein, adverse market movements can, for securities which 
are not accounted for at amortised cost, result in lower solvency (Chart 3.10, 
panel b).52 In the context of liquidity and capital ratios well above regulatory 
requirements, this risk currently appears small and may be further mitigated by 
hedges on bond portfolios. But with the increasing net supply of euro area sovereign 
bonds (Chapter 1), banks’ liquid asset holdings may continue to evolve, and market 
risks could become more prominent over time.

Strong profitability has helped banks maintain high capital ratios and increase 
shareholder remuneration. The average CET1 ratio has been stable over the past 
year, at 15.4%, and remains well above regulatory requirements. High internal capital 
generation in the form of retained earnings has continued to have a strong positive 
effect on banks’ capital ratios. Meanwhile, a marked increase in credit risk 
requirements has had a negative impact, owing to an increase in risk-weighted assets 
from corporate and unsecured retail exposures, rather than a deterioration in credit 
quality (Chart 3.11, panel a). Unless a default occurs, credit risk weights are rather 
insensitive to changes in asset quality, so credit risk exposures are instead mainly 
driven by volume effects and thus will increase further once lending growth revives. By 
contrast, a deterioration in asset quality would more likely be reflected in a higher cost 
of risk and lower retained earnings moving forward. At the same time, euro area banks 
distributed about half of their 2024 earnings to shareholders, and shareholder 
remuneration reached the highest levels observed since the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism was set up in 2015.53 It may, however, decline moving forward, should 
earnings start to fall (Chart 3.11, panel b).

The euro area banking sector remains resilient, underpinned by robust 
earnings and contained asset quality deterioration, together with high capital 
and liquidity buffers. Despite the challenging macroeconomic environment, euro 
area banks continue to report profits that are strong enough to both support healthy 
capital ratios and remunerate shareholders. Deterioration in asset quality has been 
confined to specific portfolios so far and funding costs are decreasing. Looking ahead, 
banks could see their net interest income decline somewhat as interest rates fall, while 
the broader and longer-lasting macroeconomic implications of trade policy uncertainty 
could lead to deteriorating bank asset quality and rising provisions. At the same time, 
capital and liquidity buffers remain ample and should protect banks from potential 
headwinds in light of global uncertainty.

3.5 
Preserving bank resilience is essential in an uncertain 
environment

Elevated financial stability vulnerabilities and heightened geopolitical 
uncertainty mean that preserving the resilience of the banking sector system 
remains a key priority for macroprudential policy. Countries participating in 
European banking supervision have made significant progress in building up 
releasable capital buffer requirements, with all countries now having implemented 
some form of releasable capital buffer, thereby contributing to the resilience of the 
banking sector. Since the November 2024 edition of the Financial Stability Review 
was published, another jurisdiction has implemented a framework for the early 
activation of the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB), bringing the total number of

countries with such a framework in place to ten.54 In addition to ensuring countries 
have the wherewithal to address vulnerabilities stemming from the domestic 
environment, the availability of releasable capital buffers is particularly important in 
those that are more vulnerable to external shocks, especially given current trade 
tensions and high levels of global uncertainty.55,56 Further targeted increases in buffer 
rates remain desirable in countries where their overall levels are still relatively low, as 
long as favourable banking sector conditions mitigate the risk of procyclicality and limit 
the potential costs of measures.57 In this regard, some countries that have announced 
a positive neutral approach have yet to reach their target rate (Chart 3.12). Existing 
borrower-based measures should also be maintained to ensure that lending standards 
are sound and sustainable throughout all phases of the financial cycle. Lastly, 
notwithstanding the comfortable liquidity buffers built up by banks so far, liquidity 
developments should be closely monitored given potential challenges ahead 
(Section 3.4).

57 Releasable buffers constitute only a portion of the capital stack, which also includes non-releasable 
buffers, additional requirements and guidance, as well as banks’ voluntary buffers. Notably, in several 
countries where releasable buffer levels are comparatively low, voluntary capital buffers remain at 
relatively comfortable levels.

The ECB supports the revision of the EU macroprudential framework with a 
view to enhancing its effectiveness, streamlining processes and establishing 
consistency across jurisdictions. Ensuring the usability and releasability of 
macroprudential buffers is crucial given the complex interactions between prudential 
and resolution frameworks. Improved usability of buffers would allow national 
authorities to act countercyclically in an effective manner and strengthen the banking 
system’s ability to withstand losses on a going concern basis. In this context, the ECB 
encourages greater exchange of information between microprudential, 
macroprudential and resolution authorities, the harmonisation of methods for 
measuring buffer usability and releasability across jurisdictions, and the promotion of a 
more common framework for the implementation of the CCyB (including its use early 
in the cycle), with a view to fostering effective and consistent use of the instrument 
across countries, while remaining mindful of the country-specific risk environment. 
Furthermore, the ECB advocates greater harmonisation in the setting of buffers for 
systemically important institutions, updating its floor methodology in 2024 to improve 
the assessment of capital buffer decisions. The floor methodology aims to ensure 
consistent treatment of other systemically important institutions (O-SIIs) under 
European banking supervision.58 The ECB also continues to advocate the creation of 
a common EU methodology for setting O-SII buffers, taking into account national 
specificities, institutional and structural developments, and insights gained since the 
introduction of the O-SII buffer.

The ECB also supports the ongoing implementation of the outstanding 
elements of the Basel III reforms and of enhancements to the EU bank crisis 
management and deposit insurance framework. The Group of Governors and 
Heads of Supervision, including the ECB, reaffirmed their commitment in February 
2025 to the full, timely and consistent implementation of Basel III, as any delay could 
undermine the global level playing field. The ECB also remains committed to 
coordination with international fora more generally, including the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision, helping to avoid regulatory fragmentation. However, following 
the postponement of the date of application of the Fundamental Review of the Trading 
Book to 1 January 2026, the European Commission is considering options to further 
adjust the EU’s implementation of the market risk rules to maintain a level playing field 
with other jurisdictions, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, in which 
implementation is either delayed or unclear.59 In this context, the ECB stands ready to 
contribute to any ongoing consultations. Alongside this, the Commission has made a 
legislative proposal to enhance the bank crisis management and deposit insurance 
framework, with a view to better managing bank crises and including smaller and 
medium-sized banks, and the European Parliament and EU Council have adopted 
their negotiating positions. The ECB calls for continued progress in the trilogue 
between the Parliament, the Council and the Commission to reach a consensus, 
which is vital for advancing the banking union.

Looking ahead, the ECB remains committed to reducing unwarranted 
complexities in the regulatory and supervisory framework, while preserving its 
resilience and compliance with the Basel capital framework. The COVID-19 
pandemic and the banking turmoil in March 2023 were stark reminders that a resilient 
banking sector is the cornerstone of a healthy economy, contributing to financial 
stability and fostering economic growth. Today, the European banking sector is 
resilient thanks to banks’ solid capital and liquidity positions (Section 3.4), together 
with the current regulatory and supervisory framework, which has thus far served its 
purpose well. Nevertheless, reducing unwarranted complexities would make it more 
efficient and effective. Besides the macroprudential aspects already mentioned 
above, there is room for further improvement in the areas of supervision, reporting and 
regulation, in which the ECB is already conducting significant work.60 With regard to 
regulation, the ECB stands ready to provide expert input into the evaluation of the 
effects of the current regulatory framework and potential enhancements to its 
effectiveness, while preserving financial stability. Importantly, any potential 
adjustments should not come at the expense of resilience or undermine compliance 
with the Basel framework, and need to be based on a sound impact assessment and 
cost-benefit analysis.

4.1 
Trade disputes may test non-bank asset valuations

Moreover, high stock market valuations and increasing investments in corporate 
bonds have tilted aggregate NBFI securities portfolios towards comparatively riskier 
asset types (Chart 4.1, panel b). Together with declining sovereign bond valuations, 
this may also reduce the relative amount of highly liquid assets available to non-banks 
when confronted with liquidity shocks (Box 5).

Non-banks may face higher risks of valuation losses and margin calls as global 
trade tensions increase market volatility and weigh on corporate issuers. Euro 
area non-banks’ investments include sizeable exposures to trade-intensive economic 
sectors. Around half of all European stocks held by the NBFI sector come from issuers 
that rely to a significant extent on both imports from and exports to the United States 
(Chart 4.2, panel a). Rising protectionism and trade policy uncertainty are likely to 
weigh on the outlook of these issuers in the medium term, resulting in lower 
valuations. Although revised fiscal plans have the potential to boost euro area 
economic growth and improve market sentiment, debt and equity portfolios may 
continue to see more frequent episodes of price volatility going forward. Non-banks’ 
assets are also characterised by a large share of international investments, exposing 
them to potential spillover shocks and higher market volatility globally, including in US 
markets (Chapter 2). This can also result in more frequent margin calls for non-banks 
hedging currency risks in their sizeable US dollar portfolios (Chart 4.2, panel b). 
Following the US tariff announcements at the beginning of April 2025, variation margin 
calls for NBFI entities exceeded €60 billion. On average, this equals 3.6% of cash

buffers for the NBFI sector and a notably higher 5.4% for pension funds (Chart 4.2, 
panel c). Although it seems these margin calls were manageable, they demonstrate 
the importance of adequate levels of liquid asset holdings across the different NBFI 
sectors to ensure resilience to further global market shocks.

high-yield corporate bonds (Chart 4.3, panel a). Despite the recently improved 
outlook for real estate markets, demand for real estate investment funds (REIFs) is still 
muted. REIFs remain under pressure in multiple countries as procyclical outflows 
continue to materialise (Chart 4.3, panel b).

Liquidity mismatches in open-ended investment funds might amplify adverse 
market dynamics as global trade disputes increase the risk of sudden fund 
outflows. Several open-ended investment fund types continue to show significant 
structural liquidity mismatches. As a result, liquid asset holdings are frequently 
insufficient to cover a severe yet plausible redemption shock. Liquidity mismatches 
persist in parts of the equity fund sector and are especially pronounced for corporate 
bond funds (Chart 4.4, panel a). Following the US tariff announcements in early April, 
sizeable outflows from funds investing in comparatively riskier asset types, such as 
high-yield corporate debt or emerging markets assets, have illustrated the potential for 
amplification dynamics as investors react procyclically to changes in fund returns 
(Chart 4.4, panel b). Given the significant liquidity mismatches, these funds may have 
to sell their less liquid assets at unfavourable terms to meet redemptions. This could 
lead to a further drop in fund performance, put market prices under additional 
downward pressure and encourage more investors to redeem their shares. High 
levels of trade policy uncertainty accompanied by bouts of market volatility could 
increase the risk of sudden share redemptions. In particular, large volatility in equity 
markets could expose equity funds to redemption shocks should trade tensions

intensify. Significant holdings in US assets may also be at risk of further spillovers from 
US market shocks and rising volatility in currency markets (Chapter 2; Chart 4.2, 
panel b). In the current environment of prolonged periods of high uncertainty, funds’ 
resilience could gradually weaken over time as more frequent outflows limit their ability 
to restore liquidity to adequate levels.

Euro area hedge funds increased their leverage in 2024, with sizeable derivative 
exposures in both alternative and UCITS funds. Although hedge funds remain a 
comparatively small subsector of euro area investment funds61, it is a segment with a 
high concentration of potential leverage-related risks. Hedge funds increased their 
financial leverage further in 2024 and early 2025 (Chart 4.5, panel a) from levels 
which were already structurally higher than in other investment fund types. They make 
significant use of synthetic leverage in the form of derivative exposures, which may 
give rise to margin calls during spikes of market volatility and re-enforce liquidity 
vulnerabilities in the sector. Euro area hedge funds regulated under the Undertakings 
for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities (UCITS) Directive have become 
more prevalent and tend to take on significant amounts of derivative exposures 
(Chart 4.5, panel b). Internal value-at-risk models used to determine leverage limits 
under the UCITS Directive may underestimate the risks related to leverage.

Furthermore, in contrast to funds regulated under the Alternative Investment Fund 
Managers Directive (AIFMD), the authorities currently lack the power to impose 
stricter leverage limits where excessive levels are deemed to pose a potential risk for 
financial stability (Section 4.4).

Non-banks’ liquid asset holdings have continued to decline in recent years, impacting their 
capacity to absorb shocks. In particular, the share of cash equivalents and high-quality liquid asset 
(HQLA)62 Level 1 holdings in both investment funds and insurance corporations have fallen 
substantially over the past four years (Chart A, panel a). These assets ensure that non-banks can 
meet their payment obligations in a timely manner, enabling them to absorb potential shocks and 
support euro area financial stability. This is especially important during stressed market conditions: if 
there are insufficient liquid asset holdings to meet sudden margin calls or redemptions, non-banks 
may have to sell illiquid assets at unfavourable terms. This could trigger financial contagion across 
different markets and amplify stress episodes.

The declining share of the most liquid assets in non-banks’ aggregate portfolios has been 
driven by changes in asset valuations and portfolio rebalancing towards non-HQLA assets. 
For investment funds, the drop in the share of cash and HQLA Level 1 holdings has been fuelled by 
relatively higher valuation gains on HQLA Level 2 equity holdings and growing investment in other 
non-HQLA assets. This has occurred alongside valuation losses on HQLA Level 1 bond holdings 
when interest rates started to rise in 2022 (Chart A, panel b). Insurance corporations have faced 
similar valuation effects, with valuation losses on Level 1 bonds playing a more significant role given 
their greater portfolio weight. Additionally, insurers have changed their long-term investment 
behaviour: a shift away from cash equivalents was accompanied by a higher allocation of investment 
fund shares, notably equity fund shares (Chart B, panel a), which also benefited significantly from 
valuation gains.

Aggregate HQLA holdings may overestimate the ability of non-banks to raise cash when they 
need it most, since not all assets remain equally liquid under stress. In particular, HQLA Level 2 
holdings, which in the investment fund and insurance sector consist primarily of traded equities, can 
suffer sharp valuation losses during periods of market stress and it may only be possible to liquidate 
them at a significant discount. Haircuts inspired by HQLA regulation can be used to proxy liquidity 
availability in stressed periods. While the share of HQLA Level 2 holdings has increased directly for 
investment funds and indirectly for insurance corporations via equity fund shares, the share of readily 
available liquidity after applying these haircuts has continued to decline (Chart B, panel b).