Q3 2023), as the government kept pace with its 
ongoing fiscal consolidation agenda. The lower 
deficit was driven by increased revenue collection, 
particularly from non-tax revenues resulting from an 
increase in mandatory dividend remittances from 
government owned and controlled corporations. 
The increase in public spending was driven by an 
increase in public investment and higher operating 
expenditures. Public debt remained stable at 61.3 
percent of GDP, with a favorable composition of long-
term, peso-denominated, and domestically sourced 
debt, reducing vulnerability to external shocks.

The Philippines was one of the fastest-growing 
economies in EAP, with GDP growth increasing to 
5.8 percent in Q1-Q3 2024 (5.6 percent in Q1-Q3 
2023). Services continued to lead growth, particularly 
financial services, wholesale and retail trade, and 
business services. Industry growth increased as 
manufacturing benefited from the slight recovery in 
goods exports and solid domestic demand. Increased 
construction activity likewise bolstered industry and 
investment growth, due to strong public infrastructure 
spending. However, agriculture contracted due to 
the impact of extreme weather events, highlighting 
the sector’s vulnerability to climate shocks and 
longstanding structural challenges resulting in low 
productivity. On the demand side, faster growth of 
government spending supported growth, driven by 
improved program execution. Household consumption 
growth, while still the main driver of growth, edged 
down compared to a year ago, due to inflationary 
pressures in key staple commodities and tight 
financing conditions.

The current account deficit narrowed to 3.2 
percent of GDP in the first half of 2024. It was 
supported by a modest recovery in merchandise 
exports amid stabilizing global growth and external 
demand for electronics and chemicals. However, 
services exports slowed due to moderating growth 
in IT-BPO services and international tourist arrivals. 
Higher remittances and portfolio investments 
bolstered the financial account. In addition, net foreign 
direct investment inched up alongside improving 
global investor sentiment and easing global financial 
conditions. Gross international reserves increased to 
8.1 months of imports.

Inflation reached the target, facilitating the easing 
of monetary policy. Headline inflation averaged 
3.2 percent in the first eleven months of 2024, (6.2 
percent a year ago), amid lower food and utility prices. 
However, rice inflation remained elevated at 17.8 
percent, disproportionately affecting poor households. 
To mitigate these pressures, the government reduced 
rice import tariffs and adjusted social assistance 
programs. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) 
reduced its policy rate by 50 basis points in 2024 
and lowered the reserve requirement ratio for banks. 
Monetary easing supported liquidity and lowered 
borrowing costs, aligning with global trends and 
contributing to improved financial conditions.

Unemployment fell to from 4.5 percent in 
September 2023 to 3.7 percent in September 
2024, driven by the net-creation of 2.2 million 
jobs. Strong growth in the services sector drove 
job creation, generating an additional 2.5 million 
jobs. Part of the services sector job growth was on 
the back of productivity-enhancing reallocation of 
workers away from agriculture. Agriculture declined 
in September, consistent with structural shifts in the 
economy over the past decade and weather-related 
disruptions.

Economic recovery and strong social protection 
programs resulted in a substantial reduction in 
poverty in 2023. Poverty fell to 15.5 percent in 2023, 
lower than the post-COVID rate of 18.1 percent in

2021 and the pre-pandemic level of 16.7 percent 
in 2018. This improvement was supported by the 
economic recovery since 2021, which led to strong 
job creation, a recovery in household incomes, and 
social protection programs that supported vulnerable 
sectors.

Addressing vulnerabilities through social protection 
and disaster risk management will be critical to 
sustaining progress.

Addressing gaps in human capital, particularly 
through early years investment, is vital for 
sustaining poverty reduction, boosting 
productivity, and achieving inclusive growth in the 
Philippines. Chapter 3 of the report examines the 
urgent need to unlock the Philippines’ demographic 
dividend and sustain inclusive growth. It underscores 
the critical role of Local Government Units (LGUs) in 
enhancing early childhood development by improving 
the performance of early years workers. Early years 
workers are essential for building the foundation of 
a productive and equitable society. By addressing 
critical needs during the early stages of life, they 
contribute to long-term economic development and 
the reduction of poverty, making them key players in 
achieving sustainable and inclusive growth.

The economy is projected to grow at an average of 
6.0 percent annually from 2024 to 2026, supported 
by robust domestic demand, sustained public 
investment, and a dynamic services sector. While 
the baseline growth forecast for 2024 was revised 
downward to 5.9 percent due to the intensification 
of climate-related events such as El Nino and La 
Nina, the medium-term outlook remains strong. The 
outlook will be anchored on improving conditions 
for private domestic demand. These include: easing 
inflation, more accommodative monetary policy, and 
the government’s commitment to sustained public 
investment. Altogether, these are expected to maintain 
investment rates at relatively high levels, increasing 
potential output.

The balance of risks, however, remains tilted 
to the downside, led by increased uncertainty 
surrounding the external environment. On the 
external front, there is an increase in uncertainty 
with respect to trade distortive measures by large 
economies that may affect global trade and dampen 
the global outlook. Additional external risks include 
slower growth in China, and an intensification of 
conflict and geopolitical tensions that could disrupt 
trade and commodity markets further. Domestically, 
persistent inflationary pressures, delays in monetary 
policy easing and the implementation of investment 
reforms could weaken private consumption and 
investment growth.

The Philippines currently faces a significant human 
capital challenge. The Philippines’ Human Capital 
Index (HCI)1 is estimated at 0.52, well below the HCI 
of neighboring upper-middle income countries, such 
as Malaysia (0.62), Thailand (0.61), and Indonesia 
(0.54). It is also lower than lower middle-income peers 
such as Vietnam (0.69). Despite notable economic 
progress, the level of HCI indicates that children 
are not reaching their full potential. This shortfall is 
particularly evident in early years outcomes, with high 
rates of stunting, low enrollment in early childhood 
education, and significant disparities across different 
regions.
 
Early years workers are crucial for delivering 
essential health, nutrition, and early childhood 
development services. However, they face numerous 
challenges, including shortages, inadequate 
qualifications, limited training, and low motivation. 
These challenges are further compounded by systemic 
issues at the LGU level, such as insufficient funding, 
coordination failures, and weak public financial 
management. As a result, up to 26 percentage points 
in human capital potential could be lost due to LGU-
specific factors, including governance and service

Poverty reduction is expected to accelerate, with 
the poverty rate expected to decline further until 
2026. Poverty incidence (based on the lower-middle-
income country poverty line of US$3.65/day, 2017 
PPP) is projected to decrease from 15.5 percent in 
2023 to 13.6 percent to 11.3 percent by 2026. This 
reduction is projected to be supported by robust 
economic growth, rising real household incomes. 
Climate-related shocks and inflationary pressures on 
food prices remain key risks to poverty alleviation.

delivery inefficiencies. Addressing these challenges is 
essential for improving service delivery and outcomes.

services and leveraging mechanisms like Program 
Convergence Budgeting (PCB) to pool resources 
across sectors. Additionally, it suggests improving 
the enabling environment by harmonizing the roles 
of national and local governments, building local 
management capacity, enhancing monitoring and 
evaluation systems, and fostering community-level 
coordination. These measures intend to create a 
supportive environment that enables early years 
workers to perform more effectively and to achieve 
improved early year outcomes among Filipino children.

A multifaceted approach is needed to address 
these challenges, that will require bold policy 
reforms. Reforms include building a strong foundation 
by addressing worker shortages, enhancing capacity, 
and motivating early years workers through targeted 
training programs, robust monitoring systems, and 
improved compensation and incentives. The report 
also recommends using performance-based grants 
(PBGs) to encourage LGUs to prioritize early years

1.1 RECENT GLOBAL DEVELOPMENTS: UNEVEN ECONOMIC 
RECOVERY
 
The global economy continued to stabilize in the first nine months of 2024, supported by 
resilient services trade and a pickup in consumer spending in advanced economies (AEs). 
Commodity prices eased considerably, contributing to the decline in global inflation. As a 
result, global financial conditions have eased, alleviating exchange rate pressures in several 
emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) (World Bank 2024).

Global economic activity steadied buoyed by 
growth in the services sector. Global activity firmed 
in the first nine months of 2024, despite elevated 
financing costs and heightened geopolitical tensions 
that weighed on business confidence. Consequently, 
manufacturing activity in many emerging markets 
and developing economies (EMDEs), including the 
Philippines, was buoyed by a rebound in global 
goods trade (World Bank 2024). Although the labor 
market cooled, economic activity in the United 
States (US) remained robust, driven by a pickup in 
consumer spending on both goods and services. 
Meanwhile, activity in the euro area was accompanied 
by a moderation in inflation and rising consumer 
confidence. The global Purchasing Managers Index 
(PMI) averaged 52.5 in Q1–Q3 2024, buoyed by new 
business in the services sector (Figure 1).2

pre-pandemic average (3.5 percent average growth in 
2010 – 2019). Meanwhile, new export services orders 
continued to expand in Q1-Q3 2024, driven by a 
sustained recovery in international tourism and strong 
demand for financial services. As a result, services 
exports supported growth of several EMDEs, including 
the Philippines (World Bank 2024).

Commodity prices moderated in the first eleven 
months of 2024, and global financial conditions 
have eased. Energy prices have declined since April 
2024 amid ample supply. Brent crude oil prices 
eased to an average of US$75.7/bbl in November 
(down from US$91.1 in the same period last year), 
benefitting net oil importers such as the Philippines. 
Meanwhile, the oversupply in oil became even 
more pronounced in part due to weaker demand in 
China and its increase of take up of electric vehicles 
and trucks powered by liquified natural gas (World 
Bank 2024). Similarly, natural gas prices in the US 
and Europe eased in the same period despite the 
upcoming heating season, amid high inventories and 
subdued industrial demand. Meanwhile, non-energy 
commodity prices, including for agriculture, have 
recorded a slight uptick since August. Nevertheless, 
both global headline and core inflation continued to 
decline. Along with a softening American labor market, 
this prompted the US Federal Reserve to cut the 
policy rate by 75 basis points since September.

The recovery in global goods trade remained 
below pre-pandemic levels, although global 
services trade continued to stabilize. Global 
merchandise trade expanded by an average of 1.5 
percent, yoy, in Q1-Q3 2024 (-1.5 percent over the 
same period in 2023). Goods trade expanded despite 
elevated in the third quarter shipping costs due to the 
frontloading of imports into the US in anticipation of 
potential trade disruptions. As a result, the growth in 
global industrial production more than doubled in Q1- 
Q3 2024 compared to a year ago (Figure 2). However, 
the growth in global goods trade remained below

1.2 OUTPUT AND DEMAND IN THE PHILIPPINES: RESILIENT 
DESPITE HEADWINDS
 
The Philippines remains among the fastest growing economies in the East Asia and Pacific 
region, underpinned by robust domestic demand. Stronger public consumption growth and 
investment offset a moderation in private consumption. On the production side, a recovery 
in construction activity and a modest expansion in manufacturing supported by economic 
activity. A series of weather disturbances also disrupted supply chains and limited domestic 
mobility.

The Philippines outperformed most of its regional 
peers as of the third quarter of 2024 due to 
improved domestic demand conditions. GDP 
growth accelerated from 5.6 percent in Q1-Q3 2023 
to 5.8 percent during the same period this year. This 
year-on-year growth is behind only Viet Nam (6.8 
percent) among peers in the ASEAN region. Along 
with Indonesia and Thailand, the Philippines has seen 
moderating private consumption. However, the lower 
growth contribution of private consumption has been 
more than offset by higher investment and public 
consumption spending. Monetary policy remained 
tight in H1 2024 given elevated inflation, but sustained 
disinflation into Q3 2024 has allowed the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) to reduce interest rates. 
External demand remains weak notwithstanding a 
slight YTD rebound in goods exports, given the fragile 
recovery in global goods trade.

structural weaknesses in the broader economy such 
as underinvestment in infrastructure and support 
services.3

On the demand side, public consumption and 
investment picked up the slack in household 
consumption. The growth contribution of public 
consumption rose from 0.2 ppt in Q1-Q3 2023 to 
1.0 ppt in the same period this year (Figure 5). This is 
due to faster disbursements and, to a lesser extent, 
preparations for the 2025 mid-term elections. Public 
investment spending also drove up the growth 
contribution of construction from 1.3 ppts in the same 
period in 2023 to 1.7 ppts this year. This more than 
offset the decline in investment in durable equipment 
due to still muted external demand. High interest 
rates also slowed lending for production activities. 
Household consumption continued to be the primary 
driver of domestic demand, underpinned by a strong 
labor market, steady remittance inflows, and resilient 
consumer lending. However, its contribution to growth 
declined from 4.1 ppts in 2023 to 3.5 ppts this year 
due to cost-of-living pressures particularly from still-
elevated rice prices. In Q3, household consumption 
spending accelerated for the first time this year 
alongside a significant slowdown in inflation.

On the production side, services remains the main 
growth engine of the economy. Steady demand 
for trade, financial activities, and business services 
supported the growth contribution of services in 
Q1-Q3 2024 (Figure 4). Meanwhile, the contribution 
to growth of transportation, accommodation and 
food service activities, and other services have 
moderated in part due to fading pent-up demand 
and lower growth in international arrivals. The growth 
contribution of industry increased as manufacturing 
benefited from the slight recovery in goods exports 
and solid domestic demand. Adverse impacts of a 
series of weather disturbances on crops and disease 
outbreaks on livestock led to a contraction in 
agriculture. Weather shocks also exacerbated

Exports increased due to a modest improvement 
in global demand. The growth contribution of exports 
rose from 0.8 ppt in Q1-Q3 2023 to 1.1 ppts this year. 
This was driven by modest growth in goods exports 
and services exports .The slowdown in services 
exports is due to moderating growth in information 
technology–business process outsourcing (IT–BPO)

3 In recent years, the agriculture sector’s contribution to growth has been adversely affected by the increasing frequency and intensity of extreme 
weather events, posing a growing risk to productivity and resilience. Provinces with heightened agricultural activity are also those exhibiting higher 
incidence of extreme rainfall, amplifying vulnerabil ity to crop damage and soil erosion. Source: World Bank ETIIC Firms and Climate Adaptation 
Toolkit, and Philippine Statistics Authority.

services and international tourist arrivals. Goods 
imports have started to recover largely due to higher 
imports of raw materials and intermediate goods. For 
consumer goods, growth was driven by higher import 
values of refined petroleum products and rice.

Imports of rice increased in both volume and value 
following reduced domestic production due to drought 
conditions in H1 2024 and the spike in international 
prices caused by Indian export restrictions in August 
2023.

1.3 INFLATION AND MONETARY POLICY: SLOWDOWN IN 
INFLATION AND MONETARY EASING
 
Inflation returned to the BSP’s target range as food and utilities price increases softened. 
However, the price of rice remains elevated, disproportionately impacting poor households. 
The BSP reduced its key policy rate in August and October as inflation declined and remained 
on a target-consistent path.

Moderating food inflation and lower electricity 
rates led to lower headline inflation in the first 
ten months of 2024 (Figure 6). Headline inflation 
averaged 3.2 percent between January and November 
2024, much lower than an average of 6.2 percent over 
the same period in 2023 and within the BSP’s 2–4 
percent target range. Despite the slowdown, inflation 
remained higher than in Indonesia (2.4 percent), 
Malaysia (1.8 percent), and Thailand (0.3 percent). 
Except for rice, inflation for most food items declined 
due to a stable supply and more favorable base 
effects. While the price of fish, sugar, and vegetables 
declined, meat and milk recorded small price upticks. 
Meanwhile, utilities inflation slowed as the decline 
in coal prices resulted in lower electricity rates.4 In 
addition, easing global crude oil prices weighed on 
fuel prices, contributing to lower headline inflation. 
Core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy 
items, fell to 3.0 percent in the first ten months of 
2024, lower than 6.8 percent over the same period in 
2023. The slowdown in core inflation indicates waning
underlying price pressures.

17.9 percent of the consumption basket of 
households in the bottom 30 percent of the income 
distribution. As a result, average inflation for these 
households remained higher than the headline 
inflation at 4.3 percent. In response, the government 
reduced import tariffs on rice from 35 percent to 15 
percent in July.6 To ensure the affordability of food, 
the government also plans to adjust the value of cash 
grants in the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program 
(4Ps) to account for inflation.

The BSP started its monetary easing cycle in 
August (Figure 7), as inflation eases and is on a 
target-consistent path. The BSP cut its key policy 
rate by 25 bps on August 15, which was followed by 
another rate reduction of 25 bps on October 16. The 
BSP cited the improving inflation outlook due to the 
government’s non-monetary interventions to combat 
upward price pressures as a reason for loosening 
its monetary stance. Moreover, the BSP noted that 
inflation is following a target-consistent path and 
inflation expectations remain well-anchored. The 
BSP’s decision also reflected monetary easing by the 
US Federal Reserve. In addition to cutting rates, the 
BSP also reduced banks’ reserve requirement ratio 
by 250 bps to 7 percent in September. This move 
aims to reduce distortions in the financial system, 
lower intermediation costs, and improve the pricing 
of financial services by decreasing the portion of 
deposits that banks cannot lend out.

However, rice inflation soared, disproportionately 
affecting the poorest Filipinos. Rice price inflation 
rose from 7.0 percent, on average, during the first ten 
months of 2023 to 17.8 percent in the same period in 
2024. Export restrictions abroad, coupled with lower 
domestic production due to El Niño contributed to 
rice price increases.5 Poor households are especially 
vulnerable to the high price of rice, as rice constitutes

The current-account (CA) deficit narrowed as the merchandise trade balance increased due 
to higher electronics exports in the first half of 2024. Meanwhile, net financial inflows rose 
amid higher foreign interest in domestic debt securities. The Philippine peso has weakened in 
the first ten months of 2024.

The CA deficit narrowed from 4.1 percent of GDP 
in 2023H1 to 3.2 percent in 2024H1, driven by 
higher merchandise exports. Merchandise exports 
have benefited from stabilizing global activity, 
expanding by 5.4 percent in H1 2024 due to solid 
growth in exports of legacy electronics, coconut oil, 
and chemicals. By contrast, merchandise imports 
contracted by 0.5 percent due to lower prices of coal 
and coke, as well as tepid private domestic demand 
for imported capital goods amid subdued investment 
demand as borrowing costs remained high.7 The 
merchandise trade deficit declined by 1.8 ppt of GDP 
in the same time period (Figure 8). However, net 
services trade receipts moderated by 0.8 ppt of GDP 
driven by the doubling of spending of Filipino tourists 
abroad, and slower growth in receipts from inbound 
tourism and IT-BPO exports. Meanwhile, net receipts 
in the primary and secondary income accounts grew 
due to higher income from residents’ investments 
abroad (8.7 percent, yoy) and sustained growth in 
remittances (3 percent, yoy), respectively.

financial conditions. FDI inflows continue to consist 
of mainly investments in manufacturing, real estate, 
and construction. Meanwhile, other investments 
recorded lower net inflows (1.7 percent of GDP in 
2024H1) due to lower withdrawals of currency and 
deposits abroad by private corporations, as well as by 
slower external borrowing by the national government. 
Despite the lower CA deficit and higher net FA inflows, 
the balance-of-payment (BOP) surplus declined 
from 1.1 percent of GDP in 2023H1 to 0.7 percent in 
2024H1, as the BSP recorded a smaller amount of net 
unclassified items (Figure 9).

The Philippine peso weakened since early 2024. 
The peso initially depreciated against the US dollar 
in the first half of 2024 due to fears of prolonged 
monetary policy tightening in the US, tracking the 
currency movements of its regional peers such as 
the Indonesian rupiah, Thai baht, Malaysian ringgit, 
and Vietnamese dong (Figure 10). Since July, the 
peso partially recovered as the US Federal Reserve 
reduced the federal funds rate in September. The 
US rate cut resulted in wider interest differentials 
relative to emerging economies, making assets in 
these economies more attractive to international 
investors. Between January and October, the peso 
depreciated by 7.5 percent in real effective terms 
against a basket of currencies from its major trading 
partners due to higher domestic inflation.8 Meanwhile, 
gross international reserves (GIR) rose by 8.8 percent 
during the same period, rising to US$112 billion as of 
October. The GIR remained adequate at 8.1 months’ 
worth of imports of goods and payments of services 
and primary income.

Higher foreign portfolio investments fueled the 
rise in net inflows in the financial account (FA) 
from 3.0 percent of GDP in 2023H1 to 4.7 percent 
in 2024H1. The portfolio investment account reversed 
to a net inflow (2.1 percent of GDP in 2024H1), driven 
by a tripling of foreign demand for debt securities 
offered by private corporations and the national 
government. In addition, net foreign direct investment 
(FDI) inched up by 0.3 ppt of GDP (2 percent of GDP 
in 2024H1) amid improving global investor sentiment 
and easing global

Public spending accelerated mainly due to 
higher interest payments and capital outlays. 
Disbursements increased from 22.1 percent of GDP 
in Q1–Q3 2023 to 22.6 percent of GDP in the same 
period in 2024. Current expenditures rose by 0.3 
ppt of GDP, driving the increase in disbursements. 
Interest payments rose due to additional issuances 
of government securities and fluctuating foreign 
exchange rates. In addition, maintenance spending 
increased owing to the expansion in coverage of 
social protection programs and increased spending 
on health programs. Furthermore, the expenses of 
the Commission of Elections increased in preparation 
for the upcoming national and local elections in 
2025. The increase in maintenance spending offset 
the reduction in personnel services expenditures, 
which were tempered by ongoing fiscal consolidation. 
Meanwhile, capital outlays increased by 0.3 ppt of 
GDP due to higher infrastructure spending related to 
the implementation and completion of various road 
infrastructure programs.

Public revenues increased driven by the growth of 
non-tax revenues from dividend remittances from 
GOCCs. Public revenues rose by 1.0 ppt of GDP in 
Q1-Q3 2024, of which 0.8 ppt of GDP was from non-
tax revenues. Dividends and other non-tax revenues 
rose as the Department of Finance increased the 
mandatory dividend remittances of GOCCs in April 
2024.9 Meanwhile, tax revenues increased by 0.2 ppt 
of GDP in Q1–Q3 2024, driven by the expansion in 
value-added tax (VAT) collections. VAT increased by 
0.5 ppt of GDP consistent with still robust growth in 
private consumption. Higher VAT collections more 
than offset the slight decline in excise tax collections, 
which have fallen short of the government’s target. 
The underperformance of excise taxes was driven 
in part by illicit trade in tobacco products, eroding 
the revenue base. However, tax revenues from 
international trade and transactions shrunk by 0.2 ppt 
of GDP, consistent with softer import growth in the 
first half of the year.

Employment continued to improve, with more 
Filipinos securing jobs compared to a year ago. 
The economy generated an additional 2.2 million jobs 
in September 2024 compared to a year ago, bringing 
total employment to 49.9 million Filipinos despite 
softer GDP growth in Q3 2024. Increased job creation 
led to a decline in the unemployment rate to 3.7 
percent in September 2024 (4.5 percent in September 
2023), reflecting healthy activity in the services sector 
(Figure 13). Youth unemployment similarly declined 
from 13.1 to 10.1 percent from September 2023 to 
2024. Moreover, the country continues to make gains 
in terms of the female labor force participation rate 
(LFPR). The female LFPR increased to 55.7 percent 
in September 2024 from 53.4 a year ago (Figure 14). 
This places the FLPR above the target range of 51.5–
53.5 percent target range laid out in the Philippine 
Development Plan (PDP) 2023–2028.

Despite continued improvements in the Philippine 
labor market, significant challenges persist. High 
underemployment, the prevalence of low-quality 
informal employment, and a relatively stagnant 
youth LFPR threaten sustained advancements in 
the labor market. Underemployment remains high, 
accounting for over 1 in 10 workers in September 
2024. Vulnerable forms of employment are prevalent, 
with the proportion of workers who are self-employed 
or working in family-operated farms or businesses 
increasing from 35.3 percent in September 2023 to 
36.1 percent in September 2024. Meanwhile, labor 
force participation among vulnerable groups has 
shown uneven progress, as the youth LFPR increased 
only slightly to 33.9 percent in September 2024 from 
33.1 percent in September 2023. Addressing these 
issues is critical for sustained long-term poverty 
reduction.

Robust growth in the services sector fueled job 
creation, while agricultural employment declined. 
The number of employees in the services sector grew 
by 2.5 million from September 2023 to September 
2024, more than three times the amount of services 
jobs created a year ago. Strong job creation in the 
sector reflects the pattern of structural change 
experienced in the labor market over the past decade 
and growth of the economy.10 The number of people 
employed in the agriculture and fishery sector 
continued to decline, falling by 0.3 million people over 
the same period. This reflects both structural changes 
in the labor market and the impact of weather-related 
disturbances. Employment in industry posted a 
modest increase of around 50,000, as manufacturing 
generated an additional 200,000 jobs in September 
2024, but was offset by job losses in the construction 
and utilities industries.

In a positive sign of economic recovery, the 
Philippines has made notable strides in reducing 
poverty following the COVID-19 pandemic. As of 
2023, an estimated 17.5 million Filipinos, or 15.5 
percent of the country’s population, were living in 
poverty (Figure 15). Among them, approximately 
4.8 million people, or 4.3 percent of the population, 
could not afford the basic food basket. This marks a 
significant recovery from the economic impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, during which more than 2.2 
million people fell into poverty, raising the poverty rate 
from 16.7 percent in 2018 to 18.1 percent in 2021. 
The combination of the economic recovery, continuous 
social protection programs, and the creation of 4.4 
million jobs between 2021 and 2023 helped drive 
poverty reduction during the period.

Despite widespread poverty reduction, some 
disaster prone regions, have experienced increases

10 The Philippines is among the middle-income countries which have the highest contribution of services to growth.

in poverty. Despite a reduction in inequality in 2023, 
with the Gini index dropping below 40 for the first 
time on record (Figure 16), the Philippines remains 
one of the most unequal countries in the region. In 
some areas, particularly those affected by extreme 
weather events, poverty rates increased between 
2021 and 2023. President Ferdinand Marcos Jr.

has committed to enhancing disaster preparedness 
and improving flood control infrastructure in the 
Philippines. President Marcos also emphasized the 
need to strengthen both national and local disaster 
risk reduction and response efforts, acknowledging the 
country’s high vulnerability to climate change impacts. 
impacts.11

11 The Philippines is among the most disaster-prone countries in the world, and climate change is expected to intensify these risks, particularly for the 
most vulnerable populations. An estimated 83 percent of the population is exposed to or at high risk from extreme weather and slow-onset climate 
events.

This section summarizes the global outlook and its impact on the Philippines’ medium-term 
growth prospects through different channels such as trade, inflation, and macroeconomic 
policy. Global growth is expected to remain stable between 2024 and 2026, albeit under 
rising policy uncertainty surrounding global trade prospects. The reduction in commodity 
prices over the forecast horizon is expected to support global disinflation and facilitate the 
easing of monetary policy.

Global growth is projected to stabilize between 
2024 and 2026, supported by less restrictive 
financial conditions, lower headline inflation, and 
improved consumer spending. In AEs, growth is 
projected to remain at 1.5 percent in 2024, before 
inching up to 1.8 percent by 2026. This improvement 
will be driven by the normalization of monetary policy, 
improved consumer spending amid lower inflation, 
and faster investment and export growth. While 
global trade volumes are projected to increase over 
the medium-term, trade growth will remain subdued 
compared to its pre-pandemic level. Meanwhile, 
growth in EMDEs is projected to slow over the 
forecast horizon, driven by lower growth prospects 
for China. Growth in China is projected to slow as 
consumption moderates, impacted by a soft labor 
market, subdued consumer confidence, and impact 
of declining property prices on wealth. Excluding 
China, growth in EMDEs is expected to pick up due to 
improvements in domestic demand.

global demand. This improvement will coincide with 
faster growth in the euro area and EMDEs (excluding 
China). Meanwhile, services trade growth is projected 
to gradually return to its pre-pandemic pace, spurred 
in part by the ongoing recovery in international 
tourism, which is on track to exceed pre-pandemic 
levels beginning in 2024. Despite the improvement, 
there is substantial uncertainty with respect to trade 
distortive measures introduced by large economies 
that may affect global trade. As a result, global trade 
growth is expected to remain subdued, with both 
global growth and trade activities remaining below 
pre-pandemic levels in 2024–2026.

A projected reduction in global commodity 
prices over the forecast horizon could support 
global disinflation, supporting monetary policy 
normalization. Global inflation is expected to 
continue its downward trajectory, as commodity prices 
are set to decline through 2026. The expectation of 
global disinflation is projected to lead to further easing 
of monetary policy in AEs. Easing financial conditions 
in AEs would help facilitate the normalization of 
monetary policy in EMDEs. However, monetary policy 
normalization is likely to proceed at a measured pace, 
as policymakers remain committed to price stability 
and as the decline in core inflation slows.

Although global trade growth is projected to 
rebound over the forecast horizon, rising policy 
uncertainty poses risks that could dampen the 
trade momentum. Global trade is projected to 
increase between 2024 and 2026, reflecting a pickup 
in goods trade buoyed by increased

This section provides an overview of the medium-term economic outlook, detailing projections for 
economic growth and the anticipated trends in key macroeconomic variables such as the current 
account balance, inflation, and fiscal policy. Growth is projected to improve over the forecast 
period, buoyed by improving conditions for private domestic demand due to lower inflation, easing 
financial conditions, and recent reforms that will liberalize investment activity.

Medium-term economic growth is projected to 
average 6.0 percent, year-on-year, in 2024–2026, 
supported by robust domestic demand, sustained 
public investment, and a strong services sector 
(Table 2). The medium-term outlook remains 
unchanged from the October 2024 East Asia and 
Pacific Economic Update. However, the growth 
forecast for 2024 has been revised downward from 
6.0 percent to 5.9 percent. The downward adjustment 
for 2024 reflects the impact of climate events that led 
to softer than expected growth in domestic activity, 
particularly in Q3 2024. In particular, the country was 
subject to several typhoons that resulted in significant 
damages to personal property, public and private 
infrastructure, and agriculture production. While these 
effects of El Niño, La Niña, and recent typhoons 
were disruptive in the short-term, they are unlikely 
to dampen the medium-term growth prospects due 
to improving conditions that will support domestic 
demand and improve the country’s resilience.

trade distortive measures that may impact global trade.

On the expenditure side, private consumption is 
expected to remain the main source of growth and 
is projected to expand at an average of 5.4 percent 
between 2024 and 2026. Private consumption 
growth is projected to slow to 5.0 percent in 2024, 
as inflation for key staple commodities such as 
rice remains elevated and exacerbated by still tight 
financial conditions. However, it is projected to 
accelerate to an average of 5.6 percent in 2025-
2026, due to steady remittance inflows, low and 
stable inflation, and strong labor market conditions. 
In addition, the continued expansion of credit 
amid declining interest rates, will bolster private 
consumption growth. Meanwhile, government 
consumption growth is expected to slow to an average 
of 6.4 percent, year-on-year, between 2024 and 2026, 
in line with the government’s medium-term fiscal 
consolidation agenda.

The positive outlook depends on continuing 
disinflation, more accommodative monetary policy, 
and the commitment to public investment. The 
baseline forecast is anchored on stronger domestic 
demand over the forecast horizon, supported by low 
and stable inflation, an improving job market that 
will bolster household incomes, and easing financial 
conditions. The government plans to sustain public 
investment above 5.0 percent of GDP to support 
medium-term growth and enhance productivity. 
Export growth is projected to firm up over the forecast 
horizon, albeit at a softer pace than pre-pandemic 
levels. Services exports are set to drive export growth, 
alongside the full recovery in global tourism demand 
and steady growth in IT-BPO services. While the 
forecast projects a pickup in global goods demand, 
the recovery in merchandise export growth will be 
dampened by the uncertainty introduced by potential

Investment growth is expected to strengthen, 
buoyed by lower real interest rates, a commitment 
to public investment and the implementation 
of reforms that liberalized investment. Fixed 
investment growth is projected to decline in 2024, 
before increasing in 2025-2026. The government’s 
commitment to public investment, despite fiscal 
consolidation, will support investment growth 
over the medium term. The execution of public-
private partnership (PPPs) projects will also support 
investment spending.13 While private investment 
growth is projected to remain weak in 2024, amid 
tight monetary policy and subdued global trade and 
investment activity, it will likely gain steam in 2025 
and 2026 as borrowing costs fall (Box 1). Moreover, 
investment growth is expected to benefit from the 
implementation of pro-investment reforms aimed at 
liberalizing foreign participation in key sectors.14

13 As of October 2024, the PPP center had a pipeline of 169 projects worth PHP 3.2 trillion, up from 117 projects worth PHP 2.5 trillion in Febru-
ary 2024.
14 The implementation of key reforms, such as the adoption of amendments to the Public Services Act, implementation rules and regulations of 
the Renewable Energy Act, the Retail Trade Liberalization Act, and the Foreign Investment Act, is expected to encourage private investment in key 
sectors and strengthen the Philippines as an investment destination.

This Box examines how Philippine firms’ investment and leverage respond to policy 
rate changes, finding that lower rates boost investment and leverage, with firms having 
higher leverage or operating in low external finance-dependent sectors responding more 
significantly to rate cuts.

The global shift by central banks toward looser monetary policy has heightened expectations of increased 
investment. But the extent to which firms’ investment decisions respond to policy rate changes — and the role 
leverage plays — remains an open question. Understanding the direction and strength of these connections 
is crucial for policymaking, particularly in an emerging market like the Philippines, where financing constraints 
may make borrowing costs a major factor in shaping investment outcomes. This box addresses these questions 
empirically, relying on data for 389 publicly listed firms in the Philippines across non-financial economic sectors, 
from 2006 to 2023 Philippine Stock Exchange.

First, the analysis examines the relationship between firm investment and leverage and the Bangko 
Sentral Pilipinas (BSP) policy rate, with the following firm-level regression:

where Y_(i,t) denotes the investment or leverage of firm i in year t.Macrot-1 controls for macroeconomic trend, e.g. 
real GDP growth and Zi,t-1 are lagged firm-level controls, e.g. size and profitability. We also include the firm-level 
fixed effects, that control for all time-invariant firm characteristics and cluster the standard errors at firm-year level.

The analysis also focuses on the role of leverage in the monetary policy transmission to firm investment. 
Leverage is commonly used as a measure of financial constraint16 and plays an important role in a firm’s 
investment decision. The following equation estimates how leverage matters for firm investment, focusing on the 
interaction of firm leverage and the policy rate.

where we control for both time and firm fixed effects to capture macroeconomic trends and time-invariant firm 
characteristics, respectively. As usual, we cluster the standard errors at firm-year level.

The effects of rate cuts on firms’ leverage exhibit heterogeneity across sectors. A critical question arises: 
are firms operating in sectors more reliant on external financing more or less sensitive to changes in policy 
rates? On the one hand, firms in more external finance dependent sectors face greater cost increases when 
borrowing costs rise, which may make these firms more responsive to rate changes. Conversely, if these firms’ 
business model depends on external financing, their demand for borrowing could be relatively price inelastic. To 
assess which mechanism prevails, the analysis estimates the equation outlined below.

On the supply side, services will continue to drive 
growth, boosted by improved private domestic 
demand and the ongoing recovery of tourism. 
Services growth is projected to account for nearly 
70 percent of growth between 2024 and 2026. It 
will remain anchored on the expansion of domestic 
economic activity as household incomes improve. 
Services will also benefit from the ongoing recovery 
of inbound international tourism. International tourist 
arrivals in the Philippines are projected to reach 
their pre-pandemic levels beginning in 2025 and 
will contribute to faster growth in transportation, 
accommodation and food services, and retail 
trade. Despite potential challenges from artificial 
intelligence, the IT-BPO industry will continue to 
support growth in real estate and information and 
communication services.

risks from inflation stemming from geopolitical conflict 
and heightened trade tensions.

The current account deficit is projected to narrow, 
led by steady remittance inflows, declining global 
commodity prices, and strong services exports growth. 
It is expected to decline from 1.9 percent of GDP in 
2024 to an average of 1.5 percent in 2025-2026. This 
trend will be driven by stable growth in remittances, 
the projected decline in commodity prices, and a 
slightly lower trade balance. Services exports will 
continue to benefit from the projected increase in 
tourism demand and robust performance in the 
IT-BPO industry. While import growth is projected 
to increase due to robust domestic demand, falling 
global commodity prices will contribute to the slightly 
narrower trade deficit. The current account deficit is 
projected to be financed by net FDI and portfolio 
inflows amid improving domestic conditions and 
stronger investor confidence.

Meanwhile, the positive investment outlook and a 
rebound in global goods trade will drive industry 
growth. Industry growth, which is projected to 
account for more than one-fourth of growth in 2024–
2026, will be led by the expansion of manufacturing 
and construction activity. The improvements in 
global trade growth is expected to aid manufacturing, 
particularly electronics exports. The semiconductor 
industry is expected to rebound in 2025 as it 
addresses inventory issues, expands capacity, and 
launches new products. The government’s robust 
public investment pipeline, aimed at improving 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
infrastructure and transportation and logistics, will 
support growth in the construction sector. However, 
the outlook for the agriculture sector is expected 
to remain tepid, dampened by the sector’s low 
productivity and vulnerability to weather-related 
shocks.

The implementation of the medium-term fiscal 
consolidation program is projected to lead to a 
steady decline in the fiscal deficit. The government 
is expected to reduce the fiscal deficit from 6.2 
percent of GDP in 2023 to 4.8 percent by 2026. Fiscal 
consolidation will be mostly expenditure-driven, 
with both recurrent spending and public investment 
projected to decline. Lower recurrent spending is 
expected to be supported by reforms that will lower 
personnel costs and improved spending efficiency. As 
a result, total expenditure is projected to fall by 0.8 
ppts of GDP between 2024 and 2026, in line with the 
pace of reductions in recent years. Tax revenues will 
inch up marginally in 2024–2026, in part driven by 
the passage of tax policy reforms20, improvements in 
revenue administration, and strong economic growth.

Headline inflation is projected to remain within the 
BSP’s target range, facilitating the continued shift 
toward more accommodative monetary policy. 
Headline inflation is expected to gradually decline to 
3.0 percent by 2026, comfortably within the BSP’s 
inflation target range of 2–4 percent. The decline in 
headline inflation will be bolstered by the reduction 
in commodity prices in 2025, as the global oil supply 
is projected to exceed demand by an average of 1.2 
million barrels per day in 2025. Global commodity 
prices are projected to fall by nearly 10 percent 
from 2024 to 2026, benefitting net commodity 
importers such as the Philippines. Better global supply 
conditions will provide ample buffer against upside

The combination of fiscal consolidation and robust 
growth set to reduce public debt over the medium 
term. The national debt ratio is projected to shrink 
over the forecast horizon to around 59.4 percent of 
GDP by 2026. While financing needs are expected 
to stay elevated due to the primary deficit remaining 
above pre-pandemic levels, debt sustainability will 
be bolstered by a favorable composition of debt. In 
particular, the country’s debt composition is expected 
to be characterized by a greater reliance on domestic 
borrowing and an increased share of medium-to-
long-term instruments, which reduce vulnerability to 
external shocks and rollover risks.

While medium-term growth is expected to remain robust under the baseline forecast, the 
balance of external and domestic risks remains tilted to the downside. On the external front, 
the Philippines is exposed to risks emanating from rising policy uncertainty and conflict 
that could dampen global economic activity and reverse global disinflation. Domestically, 
persistently high inflation because of supply related shocks could erode purchasing power, 
delay monetary easing, and dampen growth prospects of private domestic demand.

Progress in poverty reduction is expected to 
continue, but recurrence of climate events and 
vulnerability to food price shocks poses risks. 
Poverty incidence (based on the lower-middle-in-
come country poverty line of US$3.65/day, 2017 
PPP) is projected to decrease from 15.5 percent 
in 2023 to 13.6 percent in 2024, before falling 
further to 11.3 percent by 2026 (Figure 17). The 
anticipated increase in real household incomes will 
support the projected decline in poverty, anchored 
on the continued improvement in the labor market 
and easing inflation. However, household income 
vulnerability, particularly high exposure and vul-
nerability to climate disasters, may undermine the 
potential for continued poverty reduction. These 
weather-related shocks have in the past damaged 
homes, infrastructure, and caused disruptions to 
businesses and livelihood. Agricultural production 
is particularly affected. Damages to rice, corn, and 
high-value crops are likely to push food prices 
higher, fueling inflation, and eroding real household 
incomes that could weigh on poverty reduction.

Proactive government measures are crucial 
to protect poor and vulnerable households. 
For example, the combined impact of damages due 
to typhoons Marce, Nika, and Super Typhoon Ofel 
reached an estimate of Php926 million, nearly half 
of which was damage to agriculture. In response 
to ongoing inflation and climate-related threats, 
the authorities are actively adopting policies to 
mitigate these shocks and ensure adequate ener-
gy and food supplies. In response to high inflation 
in recent years, the Department of Social Welfare 
and Development (DSWD) rolled out the Ayuda 
sa Kapos ang Kita Program (AKAP) which aims to 
protect minimum wage workers from the impact 
of inflation. The government provides support to 
affected communities, including insurance indem-
nities to compensate farmers and zero-interest 
loans available through the Agricultural Credit 
Policy Council’s (ACPC) Survival and Recovery 
(SURE) Loan Program. Additionally, cash aid has 
been distributed to local government units to 
supply food packs and hygiene kits to households 
in typhoon-hit areas. The national government has 
also allocated funds for flood control, committing 
to effective mitigation and adaptation measures.

While medium-term growth is expected to remain robust under the baseline forecast, the 
balance of external and domestic risks remains tilted to the downside. On the external front, 
the Philippines is exposed to risks emanating from rising policy uncertainty and conflict 
that could dampen global economic activity and reverse global disinflation. Domestically, 
persistently high inflation because of supply related shocks could erode purchasing power, 
delay monetary easing, and dampen growth prospects of private domestic demand.

The risks to the global growth outlook remain 
tilted to the downside, stemming from 
heightened policy uncertainty and geopolitical 
conflict, and existing weaknesses in China’s 
economy. Heightened global policy uncertainty, 
most notably on trade, remains as a key downside 
risk for global growth. Election outcomes in 
the US are expected to contribute to further 
fragmentation in trade policy and an increase in 
protectionism. A potential tariff escalation could 
lead to higher inflation in AEs, delay monetary 
policy easing, and cause potential disruptions in 
supply chains which would dampen global growth 
prospects. Moreover, the intensification of conflict 
and geopolitical tensions could disrupt the supply 
of commodities, driving up food and energy prices. 
China’sgrowth outlook continues to face downside 
risks, with global economic implications. A 
protracted slump in China’s property sector could 
further weaken domestic demand, resulting in 
negative spillovers to global trade, manufacturing, 
and tourism in the region.

Domestically, the main downside risks to 
growth center on the strength of private 
domestic demand. While the baseline forecast 
assumes inflation will remain low and stable 
between 2024 and 2026, risks are skewed to the 
upside. Key domestic upside risks to inflation 
include supply disruptions due to adverse weather 
conditions. Higher-than-expected inflation 
arising from these damages, particularly for food, 
could erode growth of real disposable income 
and suppress private consumption growth. As 
a net commodity importer, the Philippines is 
highly vulnerable to unexpected increases in 
commodity prices. This could also delay monetary 
policy easing, and lead to persistently higher 
interest rates that could dampen the growth of 
private investment. Meanwhile, delays in the 
implementation of key private investment reforms, 
such as the amendments to the Public Services 
Act, could lead to lower-than-expected growth in 
investment.

On the macroeconomic policy front, achieving a high-quality fiscal consolidation remains as 
the top policy priority. Meanwhile, improving long-term inclusive growth requires addressing 
structural challenges in digitalization and early years human capital, as they enhance 
productivity, resilience, and competitiveness while unlocking the Philippines’ demographic 
dividend and fostering inclusive development.

The Government’s main policy challenge 
is implementing its medium-term fiscal 
consolidation program (Figure 18). Meeting 
consolidation targets will depend on the 
Government’s ability to sharply reduce public 
spending in the short term and raise additional 
tax revenues in the last two years of the Marcos 
administration. Between 2024 and 2026, the 
Government aims to reduce public spending by around 
0.8 percent of GDP. To reduce spending, the 
government could improve spending efficiency 
through procurement, budgeting, and investment 
management reforms while further optimizing the 
budget. These reforms include the implementation of 
the Government Procurement Reform Act and the 
passage of priority legislation, such as the Progressive 
Budgeting for Better and Modernized Governance Bill 
and the National Government Rightsizing Program. 
Moreover, reforming the pension system for military 
and uniformed personnel remains critical to ensuring 
long-term fiscal sustainability.21

Sustaining robust growth in the long-term 
hinges on the country’s ability to address 
structural challenges that constrain the growth 
potential. To boost growth beyond the current 
6.0 percent potential, generate more and better 
jobs for Filipinos, and reduce poverty, the country 
must focus on increasing its potential growth. This 
requires improved connectivity infrastructure, 
enhancing local governance and service delivery, 
and increasing productivity through innovation 
policy and human capital investments. For 
example, a fully and effectively implemented PSA 
amendment is estimated to increase total factor 
productivity by 3.2 percent on average, and up to 
6.4 percent in electrical machinery related sectors, 
that rely intensively on telecom and transport 
input.

The increase in revenues needed to meet the 
government’s fiscal consolidation program will 
require additional tax policy measures beyond 
those currently planned. Improving revenue 
generation is essential to minimize potential cuts in 
public spending, rebuild fiscal buffers, and finance the 
country’s development ambition. On the one hand, 
the implementation of the government’s priority tax 
measures is projected to increase tax revenues by an 
average of 0.2 percent of GDP between 2025 and 
2027. On the other hand, the government’s medium-
term fiscal program aims to increase public revenues 
by a total of 0.8 percent of GDP in 2027 and 2028. To 
enable higher collection, the government needs to

Accelerating the country’s digital transformation 
and strengthening the digital economy will be 
essential to ensure sustainable long-term growth. 
Advancing the digital economy can expand the 
country’s growth potential, as increased digitalization 
could provide expanded market access, build 
resilience to economic shocks, while increasing the 
country’s productivity, efficiency, and competitiveness. 
However, progress in digital transformation has been 
gradual, as key sectors of the digital economy have not 
kept pace with the broader economy. Moreover, the 
benefits from digitalization are not guaranteed.

When transformation efforts are undertaken without 
essential foundations—such as robust infrastructure, 
enabling policies, skilled human resources, and 
streamlined processes—digitalization risks exacerbating 
existing inefficiencies and stalling growth (Box 2).

ages significantly. However, to fully capitalize on 
this advantage, investments in human capital must 
begin early, even before birth. Maternal health and 
adequate nutrition are critical, as poor nutrition during 
pregnancy can lead to complications like anemia, 
which currently affects over a quarter of pregnant 
women in the country. Despite these opportunities, 
the Philippines faces challenges, with nearly one 
in three children stunted—significantly below 
expectations for its income level. Addressing these 
issues could unlock substantial long-term benefits for 
the country’s growth and development.

Investing in human capital is crucial for the 
Philippines to sustain its growth and seize the 
demographic dividend opportunity, which will only 
last for the next 20–25 years. The Philippines stands 
out as one of the few East Asian nations that can 
potentially achieve prosperity before its population

The Philippines faces foundational challenges in its digital economy, including slow growth, 
inadequate digital connectivity, limited ICT skills, and fragmented data governance, 
necessitating reforms in connectivity, digital skills, and data utilization to accelerate 
transformation and enhance economic outcomes.

Furthermore, in recent years, the Philippines has 
consistently and increasingly underperformed relative 
to its peers across various indices measuring digital 
maturity and readiness, affecting the government, 
economy, and society’s capacity to leverage digital 
transformation effectively (Figure 20). 23

In the Philippines, progress in digital 
transformation has been gradual. In 2023, 
the digital economy, as officially defined by the 
government, is estimated to have grown at a rate of 
only 2.9 percent22, less than half the growth 
rate of other economic sectors (PSA) (Figure 19).

22 2024 growth is likely to be higher, according to the 9th edition of the e-Conomy SEA Report by Google, Temasek and Bain, showing a 20 per-
cent growth of the overall digital economy in 2024 the Philippines based on Gross Merchandise Value, which Department of Trade and Industry 
(DTI) attributed to strategic reforms such as the Internet Transaction Act and the value-added tax on non-resident digital services.
23 UN, ITU and Oxford indices assess 193 UN member states, Descartes Institute index assesses 124 countries, IMD indices assess 64 econo-
mies and 142 cities (Kuala Lumpur, Bangkok, Hanoi, Jakarta and Manila represent respective countries in Smart City Index). Composite indices 
involve contestable methodological choices. This Box article cites indices underpinned by indicators relevant to digital government, economy and 
society to highlight trends over recent years, while not necessarily endorsing aggregation and weighting methodologies for each index.

Digital connectivity, digital skills, and limited 
capacity to leverage data effectively are among the 
primary barriers to digital transformation in the 
Philippines. The country’s fixed and mobile internet 
services fall behind those of regional middle-income 
peers in terms of access, speed, and affordability 
(Figure 21). Additionally, data traffic generated per 
internet user ranks among the lowest in ASEAN, 
and data center capacity 24 is less than one-third of 
the average in Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia. In 
addition, Filipinos are by far the least skilled in terms 
of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
skills in the ASEAN region (Figure 22). Moreover, 
weaknesses in the broader education system limit the 
capacity to learn and adopt digital skills. The World 
Bank reported a learning poverty rate25 of 91 percent 
in 2022, with 9 out of 10 Filipino children aged 10 
unable to understand age-appropriate content.

for data collection, sharing, and utilization across 
key sectors and institutions. While progress has 
been made in data privacy protection, national ID and 
digital payment—advancing people data systems for 
Government-to-Citizen (G2C) services—substantial 
gaps remain in prosperity data (firm, farm and asset 
registries; transactions and trade records) and planet 
data (geospatial data integration to broader data 
ecosystem), constraining inter-operable, efficient 
and transparent Government-to-Government (G2G) 
and Government-to-Business (G2B) services. These 
gaps limit the potential to improve economic and 
infrastructure policy planning and citizen experiences. 
Cybersecurity challenges persist, and inconsistent 
open data policies, along with a lack of interoperability 
standards, hamper the growth of public-private 
data ecosystems. The absence of a cohesive data-
enabling framework and reliance on a complex web of 
bilateral data sharing agreements prevent the creation 
of a broad, secure data ecosystem that fosters 
collaboration, positive spillovers, and firms’ adoption 
of data-driven, productivity-enhancing technology 
solutions.

The Philippines lacks a unified, whole-of-
government approach to data governance, leading 
to inconsistent policy frameworks and practices

investment, especially in underserved rural areas, 
by streamlining entry processes for a wider range 
of Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to build and 
operate networks in communities that large 
telecommunications companies typically overlook. 
Additionally, the bill promotes cost-effective 
and efficient network expansion by facilitating 
infrastructure sharing, including for small providers 
and community networks. Evidence highlights the 
positive impact of improved connectivity on firm 
productivity and its broad contribution to inclusive 
growth. Access to the internet, especially fixed 
broadband, has a significant impact on business

While progress may take time, immediate actions 
can help bridge existing gaps and accelerate 
improvements. Key initiatives include i) enacting 
legislation to enhance connectivity, ii) promoting data 
utilization by businesses and government, and iii) 
building digital skills within the workforce.

Foremost among these efforts is the prompt 
passage of the Konektadong Pinoy Bill, currently 
under Senate deliberation. It introduces a regulatory 
framework to foster broadband infrastructure

outcomes, enhancing firms’ sales, employment, and 
productivity growth (Figure 23). Moreover, a reduction 
in fixed broadband cost, is expected to increase the 
purchasing power of the lowest-income households by 
Php 307 per household at 2024 prices26.

effectively, in line with the newly enacted Enterprise-
Based Education and Training Framework Act and the 
Trabaho Para sa Bayan Master Plan. Key initiatives to 
utilize data include strengthening of trust environment 
such as through cybersecurity legislation and 
whole-of-government approach to data governance, 
frameworks and platforms for interoperability across 
government services and public-private data sharing 
and promoting investments in data infrastructure.

Complementary reforms to boost digital skills and 
ability to utilize data are essential. Digital Workforce
Competitiveness Act needs to be implemented

This chapter underscores the urgency of early investments in human capital to unlock 
the Philippines’ demographic dividend and sustain inclusive growth. It highlights 
the pivotal role played by early years workers in improving early years outcome — 
and how Local Government Units (LGUs) can help enhance their performance. The 
analysis explores barriers faced by LGUs, such as fiscal constraints, coordination 
failures, and weak public financial management, offering targeted recommendations 
to address these gaps. The chapter concludes with a call to empower LGUs, enabling 
them to support early years workers and accelerate human capital development

Human capital encompasses health, knowledge, 
skills, and experience acquired throughout one’s life 
stages; it is one of the main drivers of broad-based 
economic growth that translates into improvements 
in living standards (Wantchekon, Klašnja, and Novta 
2015). Human capital represents the assets 
embedded within individuals. Beyond their intrinsic 
worth, these qualities significantly enhance people’s 
productivity. Building human capital requires sustained 
and coordinated investments along multiple 
dimensions.

The Philippines can unlock its demographic 
dividend—but only with urgent investments in 
human capital before this fleeting opportunity 
closes. Investing in human capital is urgent as the 
country has about one generation (20–25 years) before 
the window of opportunity to reap a demographic 
dividend closes (Figure 24). Not only is it beneficial in 
the immediate term for the country to catch up with 
regional peers on key indicators, the long-term payoff 
for the Philippines is also immense. The Philippines is 
one of the few countries in East Asia that can 
potentially become rich before getting old depending 
on the quality of its human capital and the resulting 
economic growth. While China, Vietnam, Thailand and 
Malaysia are aging fast, the proportion of the working 
age population in the total population of the Philippines 
is projected to continue increasing for another 
generation, giving it a big advantage.

A child born in the Philippines today, however, will 
achieve only about half of their productive potential 
by age 18, thereby depriving the Philippines of a 
significant amount of productivity. The Philippines’ 
Human Capital Index (HCI)27 is estimated at 0.52, well 
below the HCI of neighboring upper-middle income 
countries, such as Malaysia (0.62), and Thailand (0.61). 
It is also lower than lower middle-income peers such as 
Vietnam (0.69).28 The reasons forthis are highlighted in 
detail in the Philippines Human Capital Review (HCR)

The process of building human capital is sequential 
and cumulative, underscoring the need to start 
early (Heckman 2006). Although human capital can 
be acquired over an entire lifetime, it is built most 
effectively when people are young. There are a variety 
of reasons for this, including greater brain plasticity 
at early ages and the fact that younger people 
are generally expected to engage in activities that 
deliberately build skills (such as formal schooling). 
Good nutrition in the early years as well as positive 
early experiences affect the quality of the brain’s 
architecture, laying the foundation for future learning, 
health and development (Handryastuti et al. 2022). 
Investing in the first six years of a child’s life — 
particularly the first 1,000 days between conception 
and a child’s second birthday — have the highest return 
on investment (Heckman and LaFontaine 2006). Any 
disruption to the process of building human capital 
can have long-lasting effects. The Philippines HCR 
highlights the importance of human capital investments 
across the lifecycle and stresses an urgent need to 
focus on the early years.

and include limitations in the delivery of human capital 
services at the local level, where up to 26 percentage 
points in human capital potential could be lost due to 
governance or service delivery inefficiencies (Lebbos et 
al. 2024).

Investing in human capital in the Philippines is 
crucial to sustain the economic growth achieved 
over the past decade, capitalize on the Philippines’ 
demographic dividend and build a solid middle 
class. This objective aligns with the vision of the 
AmBisyon Natin 2040, which seeks to ensure that by 
2040, Filipinos enjoy a secure, comfortable, and 
well-rooted life.29 Achieving this vision requires not 
only increasing income per capita but also significantly 
improving access to quality education, nutrition and 
affordable healthcare, quality jobs, and effective social 
protection—key drivers of productivity and human 
capital. These objectives are clearly articulated in the 
Philippines Development Plan, which emphasizes the 
need to enhance human capital as a critical foundation 
for sustained growth and development.

Effectively building human capital requires a 
combination of coordinated interventions. 
Investments in the early years, particularly ages 0 to

6, are required in nutrition, primary health care, early 
childhood education, and social protection. These are 
best implemented from a multisectoral perspective as 
they are complementary. For instance, if children 
are poorly nourished, they may not do well at school. 
Without social protection, poor families may pull 
children out of school when they face shocks. In the 
absence of adequate early childhood education, the 
future development of sophisticated cognitive and 
socioemotional skills will be challenging.

important coordination role in facilitating the 
implementation of national-level programs and 
regulations, including early education programs. Yet, 
many are unable to implement their mandate effectively.

LGUs have an essential role to play in boosting 
human capital in the Philippines, as service delivery 
is devolved to them. They have mandates, defined 
under the 1991 Local Governance Code, to deliver 
health care and nutrition services30 as well as to 
manage social welfare.31 They are also entrusted with 
delivering early childhood education services for 
3-4-year-old children, but not 5-year-olds, who are 
attended by the Department of Education. LGUs are 
where interventions and programs from various sectors 
ultimately come together and are implemented on the
ground. Consequently, they are expected to play an

3.2 EARLY YEARS INVESTMENTS ARE CRUCIAL FOR 
BUILDING HUMAN CAPITAL AND DRIVING ECONOMIC 
GROWTH

The economic future of the Philippines hinges on its people.

Between 1995 and 2018, countries that moved 
from low- to middle-income status saw their 
human capital per capita double (World Bank, 
2021). Human capital is a key driver of sustainable 
economic progress (Wantchekon, Klašnja, and Novta 
2015). Investments in human capital lead to higher 
productivity, incomes, and living standards (Flabbi and 
Gatti 2018). Worldwide, the share of human capital in 
total wealth increases steadily with the level of 
development; high-income countries have more 
human capital than their lower-income counterparts. 
Development, then, is intimately linked to building 
human capital (Figure 25).

remain lackluster compared to its peers. In contrast to 
its 0.52, Vietnam is at 0.69, followed by Malaysia and 
Thailand at 0.61. In general, the Philippines performs 
lower than all its peers on the subcomponents of the 
HCI. For instance, while approximately 27 percent of 
5-year olds are stunted in the Philippines, only 18 
percent in Indonesia and 11 percent in Thailand are 
stunted. Learning outcomes also lag other countries. 
For example, while the average student in the 
Philippines and Vietnam spent roughly the same time 
in school (12.95 and 12.86 years respectively),
students in Vietnam learn much more (about 10.68 
years of learning) than the average student in the
Philippines (about 7.49 years) as indicated by test 
scores. The Philippines’ low HCI warns of the 
constraints to productivity of the next generation of 
workers given the prevailing rates of mortality, 
schooling achievements, and health outcomes.

The Philippines is not fully harnessing its human 
capital potential – its HCI of 0.52 remains lower 
than peers with similar economic status. The 
nation’s human capital indicators that gauge 
sustainable development and people’s wellbeing

Early year investments are the most impactful 
for building human capital.

early years outcomes. Undernutrition among Filipino 
children is alarmingly high. In 2021, about one in 
four children under the age of five was considered 
stunted, or small in size for their age (Figure 27).34 That 
same year, nearly one in five children was classified 
as underweight and six percent were classified as 
“wasted,” or underweight for their height.35 These 
rates have not markedly changed in the past 30 
years, and they place the Philippines among the ten 
countries globally with the highest number of stunted 
children. In contrast, Indonesia has been able to 
reduce stunting rates from approximately 31 percent 
to 21 percent between 2018 and 2022. The impact of 
undernutrition on the development of the young brain 
and body is profound. Additionally, while the under-
five child mortality rate has significantly fallen over 
the last three decades, neonatal mortality rate has 
minimally changed with 60 percent of deaths below 
five years of age occurring among newborns (UNICEF 
2023). This points to the need to focus the delivery of 
high-quality health and nutrition services during the 
first 1,000 days of life for both the mother and child.

To be more effective, human capital investments 
must start early, even before a child is born. Early 
year interventions affect the quality of the brain’s 
architecture, laying the foundation for future learning, 
health and development (Handryastuti, et al. 2022). 
These investments also yield the highest return 
on investment (Figure 26). Investments begin with 
mothers, given the crucial role of maternal health 
in ensuring the well-being of both the mother and 
the child. For example, adequate nutrition during 
pregnancy is essential to prevent complications such 
as anemia, which affects 26 percent of pregnant 
women in the Philippines.33 Furthermore, adequate 
nutrition and cognitive stimulation for children are 
foundational for physical growth, brain development 
and future learning potential. Programs that integrate 
nutrition, health, and education contribute to the 
formation of neural connections that enhance 
cognitive and emotional growth, which in turn reduces 
stunting and improves future learning potential (Black 
et al.2016).

Enrollment in early childhood education remains 
low and stagnant, hindering the accumulation 
of foundational skills, despite most barangays 
having day care centers. In 2020-21, only 47 percent 
of three- and four-year-olds in the Philippines were 
enrolled in preschools and 66 percent of 5-year-olds 
were in kindergarten (UNICEF 2021). In contrast, in 
Vietnam, early childhood education is near universal,

Weak early years outcomes are jeopardizing 
the development of human capital in the 
Philippines

The Philippines underperforms significantly in

and in Malaysia, nearly 90 percent of children attend 
some form of early childhood education. Participation 
rates in the Philippines dipped during the COVID-19 
pandemic, with only 20 percent of Filipino children 
aged 3-4 years participating in pre-kindergarten 
programs (Figure 28). A recent study found that 
access is not the most critical problem in the system 
— almost all barangays in the Philippines have at 
least one public daycare/child development center

and about 89% of municipalities and cities meet the 
DCC/CDC to barangay ratio requirement per Republic 
Act No. 6972 (EDCOM2 2024).36 However, access 
to quality early childhood education is a big concern 
among parents, discouraging greater enrolment of 
children. Additionally, many parents hesitate to enroll 
3- to 4-year-olds, believing they are too young for 
such programs, leading to low demand (World Bank 
2023).

Low enrolment in early childhood education 
programs impacts future learning outcomes in the 
Philippines, but quality is critical. Grade 5 students 
in the Philippines who attended an early childhood 
education (ECE) program performed better in reading, 
writing, and math (UNICEF 2021). The Philippine Early 
Childhood Longitudinal Study, which tracked a cohort 
of students from kindergarten through Grade 4 found 
that students with kindergarten performed better on a 
range of skills, beginning with preparedness for school. 
These skills held students in good stead as they 
progressed through school (Cheng et al 2020). Indeed, 
starting education at the right age gives a head start 
in learning and predicts greater success in schools. In 
the Philippines, 46 percent of children who attended 
a 2-year ECE program and 40 percent with one year 
joined school at age 6 compared with 14 percent 
of their peers with no ECE (Figure 29). Students 
who started at the right age performed significantly 
better in reading, writing and math relative to those 
who started later. Grade repetition is also higher 
among students without ECE (Figure 30). Given that 
only 9 percent of Grade 5 students are proficient in 
reading an age-appropriate text, greater attention to 
ECE is essential. The longitudinal study cited above,

however, notes that even the best performing students 
with kindergarten had large gaps in conceptual 
skills, underscoring the importance of the quality of 
preschool and kindergarten education (Cheng et al 
2020).

Significant disparities in outcomes at the local 
level make the early years challenge worse

At the local level, spatial disparities in early 
childhood education are significant. For 
example, enrollment rates in pre-kindergarten in 
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim 
Mindanao (BARMM) are eight times lower than in the 
Ilocos Region. Specifically, less than 5% of children in 
BARMM are enrolled in pre-kindergarten, compared 
to nearly 40% in Ilocos. Even in affluent areas like 
Region IV-A (CALABARZON) and the National Capital 
Region (NCR), participation remains low (Figure 31). 
These disparities challenge the assumption that 
higher regional income ensures better access to 
early education, pointing to other barriers influencing 
enrollment.

Up to 26 percentage points in human capital 
potential could be lost due to LGU-specific 
factors, including governance and service delivery 
inefficiencies. Sub-national HCI calculations reveal 
significant disparities among provinces and Highly 
Urbanized Cities (HUCs), with HCI estimates ranging 
from 0.48 to 0.74 (Figure 32). Provinces with below-
median HCIs are scattered across the regions, but the 
largest number of the lowest performing provinces 
are in the regions of Bicol, Central Luzon, Davao, 
Soccsksargen, and Zamboanga Peninsula. HUCs 
show relatively higher HCIs but these vary by city. 
The HUCs with the lowest HCI are in the regions of 
Zamboanga Peninsula and Soccsksargen in Mindanao 
while the city with the highest HCI is in the National 
Capital Region. Overall, 16 HUCs (out of 33 in total)

in 11 regions have HCIs lower than the median 
of 60 percent for all HUCs. Early year outcomes 
are driving these disparities; for instance, stunting 
rates vary widely from 43.7 percent to 8.4 percent. 
Education outcomes also show large disparities, 
with enrollment rates differing significantly across 
regions and socioeconomic groups. Looking at the 
subcomponents of the HCI, the disparities are starker 
among provinces and HUCs in terms of health, 
especially for stunting and under-five mortality rates 
than for education outcomes. Based on analysis of 
budget data and qualitative case studies, governance 
and service delivery inefficiencies stood out as key 
drivers of the discrepancy. The chapter dives into these 
in the coming sections.

Differences in Gross National Income (GNI) per 
capita only partially explain the variation in HCI 
outcomes (Figure 33), with a significant portion 
of disparities likely attributable to the capacity of 
early years workers to deliver essential services. 
While there is a correlation between GNI per capita 
and sub-national HCI of 0.53, indicating that higher 
income levels are generally associated with better

human capital outcomes, this relationship does not 
fully account for the observed disparities. Findings 
from qualitative studies conducted with select LGUs 
provide nuance to challenges faced at the LGU level 
and point to a significant portion of these differences 
being likely attributable to the capacity of early years 
workers to deliver essential services (discussed 
subsequently).

3.3 High-quality community-level early year 
workers are Vital for Improving Early Years 
Outcomes

Community-based workers are crucial for early 
years interventions. Globally, successful early years 
interventions depend on high-quality early years 
workers (see Box 3). Their importance is difficult 
to match because they interface with families and 
children on a regular basis. In the Philippines there are 
four types of community-based early years workers 
in the Philippines (see Box 4 for legislation, Table 
3 for contractual details and Table 4 for roles and 
intervention details). Barangay health workers (BHW) 
and barangay nutrition scholars (BNS) provide a 
broad range of critical health and nutrition services 
for pregnant and lactating mothers as well as young 
children, especially during the critical first 1000 days 
of life. Together, they also form community health 
teams which provide outreach preventive health and 
nutrition services to household unable to regularly 
visit health facilities to avail of basic health services. 
They help mothers and children navigate the health 
system and encourage them to go to primary health 
care facilities where they could receive facility-based 
critical interventions from formal health workers (i.e.

doctors, midwives, nurses.). The shortage of medical 
personnel discussed below puts serious blocks on 
their ability to direct families appropriately.

The effectiveness of early years workers is compromised by three types of interrelated challenges: 
shortages; quality-related concerns; and motivation. Together, these impact how effectively LGUs can use 
early year workers.

The role of early years workers—such as community 
health workers (CHWs), preschool teachers, and other 
local community-based professionals—is crucial 
in driving better outcomes in health, nutrition, and 
education. Research highlights that the quality and 
availability of these workers significantly influence 
human capital development.

played a key role in reducing stunting by improving 
child nutrition through community-based programs 
and behavior change communication.

As with health, a well-prepared ECED workforce is 
a pre-requisite for the provision of quality services, 
as proved by a growing body of evidence. Teacher 
professional development has a significant impact on 
preschool attendance and early language and literacy 
practices, which are foundational for later academic 
success (Hanno and Gonzales 2022; Neuman and 
Cunningham 2009; Manning, Garvis, Fleming, and 
Wong 2017).

For example, CHWs are essential in delivering high-
impact interventions, with a return on investment of 
10:1. These workers, often based in the communities 
they serve, provide medical care, information, 
counseling, and referrals, connecting individuals with 
broader community services. In Rwanda, CHWs have

The shortage of early years workers in the 
Philippines significantly hinders the delivery 
of essential services crucial for building human 
capital in the early years. In many regions of the 
country, the limited availability of early years workers 
means that children and families do not receive the 
consistent, high-quality support needed for optimal 
development. These gaps in service delivery hinder the 
nation’s ability to build human capital. The provision 
of health services provides a striking example of 
these challenges. A strong primary health care (PHC) 
approach reliant on multidisciplinary teams of 
health workers at the community level remains the 
foundation of effective service delivery for the first 
1000-day households (UNICEF, 2024). However, there 
are severe challenges with shortages of health workers, 
uneven allocation, and inadequate capacity and 
skills-mix necessary to deliver high-impact health and 
nutrition interventions. The country has considerable 
gaps in terms of meeting the WHO recommended 
Human Resources for Health (HRH) density ratio of 
44.5 HRH per 10,000 population with the current 
density ratio only at 19.7. Inadequate HRH given a 
growing population adversely affects the delivery of 
primary MCH services (Figure 34). For instance, in 
2023, the national coverage of complete antenatal

In addition to overall shortages in HRH availability, 
there are considerable disparities. Less than 25% 
of LGUs reach the recommended HRH density ratio 
(Abrigo and Ortiz 2019). The HRH shortage is more 
severe in rural areas because of the low capacity of 
LGUs to hire, manage and retain staff as well as the 
relatively lower pay and incentives and the lack of 
opportunities for professional development when 
compared with health workers in cities and urban 
areas. At the municipality level where health and 
nutrition services are delivered through rural health 
units, the low ratio also translates to a gap of 2,031 
physicians, 4,467 nurses and 3,966 midwives.
These disparities on HRH distribution are caused by 
several factors such as the varying income generation 
capacities of provinces and municipalities and the 
current limits on the proportion of local budgets 
that could be allocated for personnel services which 
disadvantage the poorest LGUs in terms of their 
ability to hire, retain and compensate staff. Hence, 
many LGUs rely often on community health volunteers 
to deliver basic and essential health and nutrition 
interventions.

instance, in urban areas, this ratio can escalate to 
30, exceeding the standard by threefold (see Table 
5 ). Given the low enrollment rate in early childhood 
education, there is a need for strategies to boost the 
supply of CDW in conjunction with efforts to enhance 
demand through universal access to early childhood 
education. The country’s current workers are short 
of around 90,000 to meet the 240,000 DCW/CDW 
required to meet 100% of the demand.

that undermine their professional status and 
effectiveness. Despite having their roles defined in 
national policies, early years workers are yet to be 
fully professionalized. They struggle with unstable 
compensation, expectations of voluntarism, resource-
constrained environments, limited tools and high 
turnover rates linked to political cycles. For instance, 
BHWs and BNSs face increasing workload often 
overseeing as many as 150 households instead of the 
Department of Health (DOH) standard of one BHW/
BNS per 20 households. This compromises their ability 
to deliver consistent early childhood development 
services across regions. Pay remains a challenge with 
reports of early years workers often missing salaries. 
The unregulated employment status of CDWs only 
allows for a small amount of compensation relative to 
their workload. Career progression opportunities are 
weak. For instance, although BNSs enjoy the same 
eligibility for civil service access, training opportunities 
are awarded to high performers but not necessarily 
tracked and there is no formal career ladder. A review 
of practices pertaining to early years workers found 
little structured, supportive supervision for these 
cadres (BHW and BNS are part of a CHT and have an 
allocated supervisor, as do CDWs). Quality assurance 
was generally lacking across all programs.

In addition to shortages, many early years workers 
lack mandated qualifications. In 2015, the ECCD 
Council updated standards for center-based ECE 
programs for children aged 0-4, with guidelines 
requiring CDWs to hold bachelor’s degrees, and 
teacher aides needing at least complete secondary 
education. Ideally, each CDC should have one CDT 
or CDW and a teacher aide (World Bank 2023). 
However, due to limited resources, many CDCs rely 
on underqualified staff or unpaid parent volunteers. 
A report by the Philippine Institute for Development 
Studies (PIDS) found that about half of the CDWs 
in the Philippines have only completed high school, 
while the other half are college graduates (PIDS 
2024). The proportion of college-educated CDWs 
varies across local governments and is influenced by 
income levels, with cities having a higher percentage 
of college-educated daycare workers (Figure 35). 
Another study found that the number of accredited 
CDWs dropped from 72 percent in 2018 to 11 percent 
in 2022, suggesting that many programs are handled 
by unqualified CDWs even in centers with valid 
accreditation status (World Bank 2023).

Early years workers are also not adequately 
trained. A UNICEF (2024) assessment highlighted 
significant deficiencies in training programs. For 
example, BNSs are expected to undergo 10 days of 
classroom training followed by a 20-day practicum. 
However, due to limited funding and resources, this is 
often reduced to just a 5-day course or an orientation 
with on-the-job training. The basic training provides 
minimal guidance on delivering nutrition services 
focused on behavior change and excludes topics like 
early childhood development (ECD) and nurturing 
care. These gaps call for updates in line with the 
Department of Health’s expanded scope of work 
introduced in 2021. BHWs have a vast scope of work 
but receive only three days of basic training delivered 
once, and a national curriculum is yet to be developed. 
There is little information on the training received by 
FDSWs. There is also a lack of regular supervision, 
monitoring and mentoring programmes as part of 
a holistic human resource development strategy to 
improve their performance.

Political interference impacts motivation as 
early years workers are often replaced. Multiple 
studies point to the uncertainty associated with these 
appointments, with reports of these being politically 
determined (PIDS, 2024). Moreover, newly elected 
local chief executives (can be Barangay Captains or 
even city/municipal mayors) sometimes allegedly 
remove previously trained BHW/BNS (who may have 
been hired by the previous local chief executive) 
and recruit new ones who belong to their political 
affiliations.

early years workers, exacerbate disparities in critical 
early years outcomes, such as stunting and under-five 
mortality rates and disproportionately affect lower-
performing provinces and HUCs.

The Philippines has established robust policies and frameworks to enhance early year 
outcomes, with national and local agencies playing key complementary roles

The Department of Interior and Local Government 
(DILG) at the national level plays a key role in the 
implementation of the early years agenda. DILG 
oversees LGUs, who as discussed below have the 
mandate for implementing early years interventions 
(0-4 years), while coordinating with national 
government agencies on the same. Its key functions 
include ensuring: (1) vertical alignment between 
the key early years programs designed by national 
government agencies and councils and their 
implementation at the local level by LGUs; (2) 
assessing and monitoring LGU performance; and 
(3) training for LGUs. It is important to note that 
two of the main legislations governing the early 
years — the Early Years Act 2013 and the First 1000 
Days Law — identify who should be responsible for 
financing, delivery and standards and regulations, 
but do not include DILG. This creates a fundamental 
accountability problem.

LGUs are expected to play a key role in service 
delivery as defined by the Local Government 
Code of 1991. In recent years, the Philippines 
has passed and proposed landmark pieces of 
legislation to strengthen systems for delivering 
health, nutrition and early childhood interventions 
with a focus on increasing resources and mandating 
greater responsibilities to LGUs (see Box 4). The 
Local Government Code of 1991 was designed to 
decentralize governance and empower LGUs by 
granting them greater autonomy and responsibility. 
This legislative framework aimed to enhance local

Recognizing the multisectoral nature of 
interventions, the national government has set up 
multisectoral councils at the national level. These 
councils are expected to ensure coordination across 
agencies (see Table 6). Together, the government 
agencies and multisectoral councils provide LGU level 
support through regional offices. In this context, it is 
important to note that while DOH, DSWD, and DILG 
are national agencies, their service mandates are fully 
decentralized to local-level counterparts. In contrast,

governance by devolving functions and increasing 
the share of national revenues allocated to LGUs. The 
Mandanas-Garcia Ruling further reinforced this by 
mandating a significant increase in the National 
Tax Allotment (NTA) transfers to LGUs,43 providing

LGUs additional financial resources. In 2022, the 
ruling increased the IRA by for LGUs by approximately 
37.9%. LGUs are once again expected to receive a 
substantial increase in NTA transfers in 2025, by 
nearly 20 percent year-on-year. 44

National Nutrition Council (NNC)45
The NNC is the country’s highest policy-making 
and coordinating body ensuring the nutritional 
well-being of Filipinos. It is mandated to 
orchestrate government, private sector and 
other relevant stakeholder efforts through policy 
and program formulation, resource mobilization, 
capacity development, nutrition surveillance, 
promotion of good nutrition and fostering 
alliances and partnerships

LGUs are uniquely placed to ensure convergence 
of services at the household and individual level, 
but many LGUs are unable to do so. The provision 
of essential maternal and child development services 
particularly during the first 1000 days hinges on 
the adequacy of a multidisciplinary health team 
composed of doctors, nurses and midwives supported 
by community health teams, CDWs and FDSWs. This 
in turn depends upon how LGUs manage early years 
workers: all four types of early year workers depend 
on the support and funding of local governments to 
ensure the adequacy, quality and sustainability of the 
services they coordinate and deliver.

of an LGU to raise revenues depends on the dynamism 
of its local economy and its socio-demographic 
characteristics, but structural political economy 
factors also play a major role. For example, local 
politicians are wary about updating their local taxation 
schedules because they may lose in the next elections 
(Atienza and Go 2023). Moreover, as the Mandanas 
Ruling increases NG transfers to LGUs, it may further 
create disincentives for LGUs to raise their revenues 
from local sources.

In addition to funding, LGUs must also prioritize 
human capital and thereby investment in early 
year workers. Despite a substantial increase in NG 
transfers between 2021 and 2022, LGUs’ spending 
on human capital did not increase commensurately 
(Figure 36). Most of the budget increase was directed 
to General Public Services, with 1.5 percentage 
points (ppt) of GDP out of 1.8 ppt going to Personnel 
Services and Maintenance. Indeed, NG transfers 
covered about two-thirds of LGUs’ total expenditures 
and one-third of their spending on human capital over 
the past five years. However, the share allocated to 
health, nutrition, and social welfare fell by five ppt. 
Qualitative insights from six LGUs highlight disparities 
in budget prioritization, particularly pointing to the 
role of local political motives in influencing budget 
allocation decisions. For example, some LGUs may 
favor short-term investments like infrastructure over 
human capital investments, which yields longer-term 
benefits. However, examples like Mabalacat City 
and Navotas City illustrate the success that can be 
achieved when human capital investments, 
such as early childhood care and development, are 
prioritized. (Lebbos et al. 2024).

LGU ability to invest effectively in early years 
workers is hindered by fundamental challenges

Despite multiple efforts to strengthen LGUs, they 
continue to encounter numerous challenges that 
impact the availability, capacity and motivation of 
early years workers and ultimately their ability to 
deliver on their service mandates. The challenges 
include (i) limited, dependent, and inefficient fiscal 
resources; (ii) coordination failures and unclear 
accountability; and (iii) capacity challenges in public 
financial management (PFM).

For LGUs to meet implement policies on early 
years workers, they need adequate funding, but 
face numerous constraints. National government 
(NG) transfers remain the primary source of revenues 
for LGUs relative to local tax and non-tax revenues 
(Diokno-Sicat, Adaro, and Maddawin 2020). In the 
last five years, NG transfers represented, on average, 
59 percent of the LGUs’ total revenues and receipts. 
Following the Mandanas-Garcia Supreme Court Ruling 
of 2021, which resulted in an increase in the NG 
transfers to the LGUs beginning in 2022, the transfers 
increased by 38 percent between 2021 and 2022. The 
Local Government Code of 1991 empowers LGUs to 
raise local revenues through taxes, fees, and charges, 
but various constraints keep LGUs dependent on NG 
transfers. Only about 40 percent of LGUs’ revenue is 
generated from local sources. Generally, the capacity

Limited coordination between national government 
agencies (NGA) and LGUs results in the dilution 
and duplication of efforts (Juco et al. 2023).49 For 
example, DepEd is entrusted with ensuring universal 
access to kindergarten (5-year-olds). However, to 
ensure students join at the right age and are prepared 
for kindergarten, the DepEd needs to coordinate on 
curriculum and quality assurance with LGUs as they 
are mandated with providing preschool education