Floods may affect agricultural production, amid slow cultivation ..................................................................... 11

The food and oil price shock caused inflation to surge ....................................................................................... 12

Diesel and fertilizer imports declined as prices increased ................................................................................... 14

The fiscal deficit is expected to narrow, but remains relatively large at 4.6 percent of GDP ....................... 20

A temporary expansion of social cash assistance would mitigate poverty ....................................................... 37

Rising inflation is particularly harmful to poor 
households. As discussed in the Special Focus 
section below, faced with a budget constraint, 
higher prices can lead the poor to reduce 
consumption and to change their consumption to 
less expensive and lower-quality goods. Higher 
prices may also lead the poor to withdraw children 
from school. As a consequence, inadequate 
spending on nutritious food, and withdrawal of 
children from schooling, can have detrimental 
long-term effects on human capital, causing losses 
in worker productivity and welfare, and disparities 
in income in the future. 
 
To mitigate impacts of the food and oil price 
shock, the authorities are planning to 
introduce 
additional 
social 
assistance 
measures, while extending the existing COVID-
19 cash transfer program until end-2022. The 
program 
benefits 
approximately 
706,060 
households (2.8 million individuals) or 17 percent 
of the population. As of October 2022, the 
program had disbursed US$837.05 million (about 
2.7 percent of GDP) after its launch in June 2020. 
Since the third quarter of 2022, there have been no 
(reported) COVID-19-related deaths, and the daily 
infection cases remained contained at single digits, 
reflecting the country’s success in rolling out its 
vaccination program. By end-October 2022, about 
88.0 percent of the population had received two 
doses of the COVID-19 vaccine and 61.4 percent 
had received booster doses.

While 
recovering 
from 
COVID-19, 
Cambodia’s economy is now facing global 
economic 
headwinds. 
Real 
growth 
has 
strengthened, underpinned by an increasingly 
broad-based economic recovery. Since the second 
quarter of 2022, the recovery has gained 
momentum on the back of continued resilient 
garment, travel goods, and footwear exports. The 
services sector, especially the travel and tourism 
industries, has also improved as the strategy of 
“living with COVID-19” introduced late last year 
paid off. Total international arrivals steadily 
improved, reaching 1.2 million during the first 9 
months of 2022. Reflecting growing investor 
confidence, investment, including FDI, has also 
picked up. However, Cambodia’s small, open 
economy is now confronting global economic 
headwinds as world trade growth started to slow in 
the second half of 2022 amid a gloomy and 
uncertain global outlook. 
 
The current account improved in the first half 
of 2022 as the trade deficit narrowed. 
Cambodia’s goods export growth accelerated, 
surpassing its pre-pandemic growth rate. In the 
first 8 months of 2022, merchandise exports 
surged, growing at 28.6 percent y/y, driven largely 
by exports of main manufacturing products, 
namely garment, travel goods, and footwear, which 
grew at 30.3 percent y/y. Merchandise imports 
growth eased, increasing 18.3 percent y/y. This led 
to a temporary improvement in the trade balance. 
However, Cambodia’s terms of trade have 
worsened since the second quarter of 2022, with 
the impact of higher oil prices partially offsetting 
the deceleration in import growth. Overall, 
Cambodia’s current account recorded an estimated 
deficit of 11.2 percent of GDP in the first half of 
2022. 
 
Rising global energy, fertilizer and food prices 
prompted a surge in inflation. Consumer price 
inflation accelerated to 7.8 percent in June but 
eased to 4.9 percent in August 2022. The relatively 
high weight of the transport component of 12 
percent of the country’s Consumer Price Index 
consumption basket exacerbates these negative 
impacts. The oil and food price shock has also 
started to affect agricultural production, as the 
prices of fertilizer and pesticide have increased.

Monetary 
policy 
continued 
to 
be 
accommodative, underpinning the economic 
recovery. Broad money growth eased slightly to 
12.0 percent y/y in August 2022, down from 16.1 
percent during the same period last year as foreign 
currency deposit growth slowed. Private sector 
deposit growth, however, remained robust at 14.2 
percent as confidence in the banking system 
continued. Reflecting a solid demand for credit to 
finance the economic recovery, domestic credit 
growth was strong, increasing by 22.7 percent. 
Despite increased pressures caused by persistent 
external imbalances and appreciation of the U.S. 
dollar, the exchange rate continued to be broadly 
stable. The exchange rate was 4,150 riel per U.S. 
dollar in October 2022, compared to 4,074 riel per 
U.S. dollar during the same period last year. Gross 
international 
reserves, 
however, 
marginally 
declined to US$18.4 billion (8-month import

year’s economic recovery. Even though the 
economy is expected to further expand next year, 
supported by a recovery of domestic consumption 
as employment rates improve and inflation 
recedes, 
along 
with 
strong 
government 
consumption during an election year, real growth 
projection for 2023 has been downgraded to 5.2 
percent due to the less favorable global outlook. 
 
In the short term, the fiscal balance is 
projected to continue to normalize on the back 
of stronger growth and better revenue 
administration. This is expected to result in 
buoyant revenue performance, while expenditure 
is expected to ease with the decline in demand for 
COVID-19 related spending. Inflation is expected 
to decelerate to 4.2 percent and 3.8 percent in 2023 
and 2024, respectively. The external account sees 
further improvement through relatively resilient 
exports. Poverty is expected to decline due to the 
projected economic recovery and moderate 
inflation. 
 
Over the medium term, the economy is 
expected to trend back to potential, growing at 
around 6 percent. The tourism and hospitality 
industries are likely to accelerate further, with 
projected increases in international arrivals and 
domestic tourists once the pandemic is behind us. 
Agricultural 
production 
and 
agroprocessing 
industries continue to be boosted by newly ratified 
free trade agreements. In addition to the 
Cambodia-China Free Trade Agreement (CCFTA) 
and the Regional Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership (RCEP), which have been in effect 
since January 2022, the Cambodia-Republic of 
Korea Free Trade Agreement (CKFTA) will go 
into effect in December 2022. The travel, 
transport, and logistics industry should be boosted 
by strong investment in several key infrastructure 
projects, such as a newly built expressway linking 
Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville, where a deep-sea 
port is located; a new logistics complex and 
multimodal port development project in Kampot; 
and a new expressway project linking Phnom Penh 
to Bavet, on the Cambodia-Vietnam border. 
 
Challenges and risks

The 
economic recovery 
and 
continued 
improvements in revenue administration 
underpinned 
across-the-board 
revenue 
growth. Domestic revenue growth has now fully 
recovered. During the first 8 months of 2022, 
central government revenue collection, which 
accounts for 92.1 percent of total domestic 
revenue, increased by 23.8 percent y/y, outpacing 
nominal GDP growth. After accelerating last year 
to meet rising pandemic-related spending demand, 
budget expenditure is expected to decelerate this 
year. During the first 8 months of 2022, central 
government expenditure recorded an 8.4 percent 
y/y decline as capital expenditure slowed. Fiscal 
revenue, including grants, is projected to improve, 
reaching 22.8 percent of GDP. Expenditure is 
expected to decline to 27.4 percent of GDP. The 
fiscal deficit is, therefore, projected to narrow, but 
remains relatively large at 4.6 percent of GDP. The 
deficit will continue to be largely financed by 
external borrowing, covering about 90 percent of 
the financing requirements, while the rest is to be 
financed by a drawdown of government deposits 
(fiscal reserves), which stood at 17.1 percent of 
GDP by August 2022. Cambodia’s public debt-to-
GDP ratio reached 32.3 percent by mid-2022. 
 
Outlook

Cambodia’s real GDP growth projection has 
been revised up to 4.8 percent in 2022 on the 
back of a more broad-based economic 
recovery (see table ES1). The surge in 
manufacturing 
exports—especially 
garment, 
footwear, travel goods, and bicycle manufacturing; 
the revival of the travel and tourism industries; and 
the return of FDI inflows have helped sustain this

Although the near-term growth outlook has 
improved marginally since April, risks are tilted to 
the downside. Global trade growth is projected to 
slow sharply in 2023 as the global economy faces 
strong headwinds. According to the World Trade 
Organization, world merchandise trade volume is 
expected to slow sharply to 1.0 percent in 2023, down 
from 3.5 percent in 2022. The dangers of inflation,

slow growth, lower productivity, the drain on global 
energy supplies, and higher interest rates are impacting 
developing countries. Cambodia’s export-oriented 
manufacturing is vulnerable to an extended slowdown 
in the United States, Cambodia’s largest export market. 
Similarly, the slowdown in China, Cambodia’s largest 
source of foreign direct investment, if sustained, will 
negatively impact investment and capital inflows into 
the country. The European Union, Cambodia’s 
second largest export market, is facing significant 
downward risks amid high energy prices and inflation. 
 
Global financial tightening has started to 
negatively impact the economy. Cambodia has 
been experiencing a deceleration of foreign currency 
deposit growth, reflecting the easing of capital inflows. 
There have been depreciation pressures on the 
riel/U.S. dollar exchange rate, which required 
interventions in the foreign exchange market and led 
to the decline in Cambodia’s gross international 
reserves. As pressures on domestic interest rates 
emerged, the country’s commercial real estate sector 
faced increased risks. 
 
If elevated energy prices linger, a further 
deterioration of the terms of trade will 
undermine 
consumer 
confidence 
and 
corporate profitability, and potentially prevent 
the economy from reaching potential growth by 
2024. Further, intensifying geopolitical tensions, 
including a prolonged war in Ukraine, growing 
stagflationary 
headwinds, 
rising 
financial 
instability, continuing supply-side constraints, and 
worsening food insecurity all present serious risks 
to Cambodia’s projected path to economic 
recovery. Even though Cambodia maintains policy 
space that it could deploy should these risks 
materialize, its fiscal buffers have shrunk, after 
years of government fiscal intervention. 
 
Policy options 
 
With the recovery from COVID-19 still 
underway, Cambodia must now navigate 
through global economic headwinds. While 
demand for social assistance spending continues, the 
fiscal space has shrunk. To mitigate impacts of the oil 
and food price shock, the authorities are planning to 
introduce additional social assistance measures on top 
of the existing COVID-19 cash transfer program. 
Cambodia entered the pandemic with ample fiscal 
buffers, but the economic contraction in 2020 
combined with large (and protracted) spending on 
health and social assistance led to a substantial 
increase in the fiscal deficit and the debt level. 
Once the recovery becomes more entrenched, 
policies will need to shift towards consolidation to

ensure fiscal sustainability and regain fiscal space. In 
this context, it is important to start broadening the 
tax base by introducing a personal income tax. Due 
mainly to the absence of a personal income tax, 
Cambodia’s direct revenue as a share of total 
domestic revenue remained relatively low at 25 
percent in 2020, compared to 30.1 percent in 
Thailand and 36.6 percent in the Philippines. 
 
Safeguarding financial stability is crucially 
important. The country’s commercial real estate 
sector faces increased risks as financial conditions 
tighten. It is crucial to closely monitor the current 
elevated credit growth, high levels of private debt, 
rising 
nonperformance 
loans, 
and 
the 
concentration of related risks in the construction 
and real estate sectors to ensure macrofinancial 
stability. To this end, it is important to safeguard 
the financial system with bank restructuring, 
corporate insolvency, deposit insurance, and debt 
restructuring regulations. There is a need to rein in 
the high credit growth and the concentration of 
credit in the real estate sector. Disruptions in the 
commercial real estate market could in turn 
potentially threaten financial stability through the 
connectedness of the sector with the financial 
system 
and 
the 
broader 
macroeconomy. 
Continued vigilance is warranted on the part of 
financial supervisors to mitigate such risks. In 
addition, negative impacts of global financial 
tightening point to the importance of ongoing 
dedollarization efforts. 
 
Promoting the domestic economic sectors, 
focusing on the travel, tourism, and hospitality 
industries should help partly offset the 
deterioration of external demand conditions. In 
this regard, Cambodia must address key issues as 
indicated in the 2021 World Economic Forum’s 
Tourism and Travel Development Index, in which 
Cambodia was ranked 79th, compared to 52nd for 
Vietnam and 36th for Thailand. Those issues 
include tourism service infrastructure, port 
infrastructure, environmental sustainability, and 
business environment. Despite a rapid expansion 
of the road network during the last several years, 
the country continues to exhibit insufficient 
connectivity to secondary destinations and last-
mile road networks. There are several issues related 
to quality of services such as management (and 
provision) of waste and wastewater, piped clean 
water supply, and access to reliable electricity that 
need to be addressed. Those issues can only be 
resolved 
with 
improved 
destination-level 
management. And successful facilitation of 
coherent private sector leadership of the sector 
should help create a “crowding-in” effect,

anchored to comprehensive long-term plans, 
catalyzed by public seed funding. 
 
It is equally important to address supply chain 
constraints, which include high logistics and 
transportation costs to boost exports. The national 
logistics costs in Cambodia, estimated at 26.4 
percent of GDP in 2020, are significantly higher 
than in comparable Association of Southeast Asian 
Nation (ASEAN) countries such as Indonesia (22

percent of GDP), Vietnam (20 percent of GDP), 
and Thailand (14.1 percent of GDP). To this end, 
it is necessary to address the high inventory costs 
in Cambodia by promoting access to finance and 
inventory management capabilities, while reducing 
transport costs by further facilitating trade. It is 
also essential to continue addressing supply-side 
bottlenecks by reducing the cost of energy, doing 
business, and licensing, especially for the exports 
sector, to revive external competitiveness.

FIGURE ES.1. CAMBODIA’S RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AT A GLANCE 
Real growth continues to gradually recover…

…Thanks to continued strong goods exports...

…While approved FDI value remained robust…

…But the oil price shock pushed up inflation…

…Revenue growth recovered, narrowing the fiscal

However, Cambodia’s small, open economy is 
now facing global economic headwinds (see 
also box 1 for global economic developments and 
outlook). 
Cambodia’s 
export-oriented 
manufacturing sector is vulnerable to an extended 
slowdown in the United States, Cambodia’s largest 
export market. Similarly, the slowdown in China, 
Cambodia’s largest source of FDI, is negatively 
impacting investment and capital inflows into the 
country. The European Union, the second largest 
export market for Cambodia, is also facing 
significant recession risks.2 
 
Globally, financial conditions have tightened 
notably this year, leading to capital outflows from 
many emerging and frontier market economies 
with weaker macroeconomic fundamentals.3 Amid 
heightened 
economic 
and 
geopolitical 
uncertainties, investors aggressively pulled back 
from risk taking in September. There is risk of a 
disorderly tightening of financial conditions that 
may be amplified by vulnerabilities built over the 
years.

Cambodia’s 
economic 
recovery 
gained 
momentum (figure 1) on the back of continued 
resilient exports, a revival of the services sector, and 
a recovery of foreign direct investment (FDI) 
inflows. Since the second quarter of 2022, the 
traditional export-oriented industries—especially 
garment, travel goods, footwear, and bicycle 
manufacturing—have expanded further. The 
services sector, especially the travel and tourism 
industries, has also improved, with rising 
international 
arrival 
numbers. 
Investment, 
especially FDI in the tradeable sectors, has also 
accelerated. The country has experienced a broad-
based economic recovery, after adopting a strategy 
of “living with COVID-19” in late 2021. Since late 
June 2022, new COVID-19 infections have been 
detected, caused primarily by the spread of the 
Omicron variant; however, infections remained 
contained at single-digit cases per day (figure 2). 
There were no reported COVID-19-related deaths 
since early this year, reflecting the country’s success 
in rolling out its vaccination program. By end-
October 2022, about 88.0 percent of the 
population had received two doses of the COVID-
19 vaccine and 61.4 percent had received booster 
doses.1

While remaining strong, goods 
exports showed signs of easing

Goods (excluding gold) exports remained 
strong, underpinned by continued external 
demand. During the first eight months of 2022, 
goods exports grew at 28.0 percent y/y (figure 3). 
Manufacturing exports of the top three items—
garment, travel goods (bags), and footwear (GTF)

products—which account for 64.8 percent of total 
goods (excluding gold) exports, remained strong, 
reaching US$9.1 billion, a 30.3 percent y/y increase. 
Exports of non-GTF products, which mainly 
include bicycles, wood products and furniture, 
electrical/vehicle parts and cables, and agricultural 
commodities (rice, rubber, and banana), account 
for the remaining 35 percent, growing at 23.9 
percent y/y during the same period. However, the 
growth rate of goods exports decelerated from its 
peak of 37.7 percent in May 2022, likely reflecting 
softening demand. According to the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), global trade has lost 
momentum in the second half of 2022 and will 
remain subdued in 2023 as multiple shocks weigh 
on the global economy.4 
 
Goods 
exports 
to 
the 
United 
States, 
Cambodia’s largest export market, accounting 
for 45.6 percent of total exports, continued to 
be strong. Goods exports to the United States 
reached US$6.4 billion, with a whopping y/y rise of 
37.0 percent during the first 8 months of 2022 
(figure 4), despite expiration of the U.S. 
Generalized System of Preferences program on 
December 31, 2020, reauthorization of which is 
pending U.S. congressional approval. Since 2020, 
the United States has been Cambodia’s largest 
export market. The share of the U.S. market in total 
goods exports rose quickly to 45.6 percent in 2022, 
from 27.6 percent in 2019 at the expense of that of 
the European Union (EU) market, which declined 
to 19.8 percent from 28.1 percent during the same 
period, partly affected by the partial withdrawal of 
the EU’s Everything But Arms preferential

treatment, effective August 12, 2020 (impacting 
approximately 20 percent of Cambodia’s exports to 
the EU). 
 
In addition, Cambodia’s exports to the United 
States are more diversified than those to the 
EU. For the U.S. market, while exports of GTF 
products continue to capture the largest share, they 
account for only 59.1 percent, compared to 80.9 
percent in the EU market. The second, third, and 
fourth largest non-GFT export items destined for 
the U.S. market are wood products/furniture (5.2 
percent), electrical/vehicle parts and cables (4.5 
percent), and bicycles (3.8 percent), respectively. 
The shares of these higher value-added non-GTF 
products continued to be relatively small due to 
Cambodia’s structural weaknesses, which include 
high logistics and energy costs, and a skills gap. 
 
China is an increasingly important export 
destination 
for 
Cambodia’s 
agricultural 
commodities, thanks to the Cambodia-China Free 
Trade Agreement (CCFTA), which went into effect 
on January 1, 2022. While the Chinese market 
accounts for US$805 million, or 6.0 percent of total 
goods exports, it captured 40 percent (US$281 
million) 
of 
Cambodia’s 
total 
agricultural 
commodity exports (US$715 million) during the 
first 8 months of 2022. For the Chinese market, 
bananas, milled rice, and cassava are the three 
largest agricultural commodity export items, 
accounting for 99 percent (US$140 million), 37.8 
percent (US$94 million), and 75 percent (US$21 
million), respectively (figure 5). Rubber exports to 
China remained relatively small, amounting to 
Figure 3. Goods exports remained strong

US$13 million or 6.2 percent of total rubber 
exports. Under the CCFTA, over 90 percent of 
tariff lines of trade in goods5 for both sides enjoy 
zero tariff, and the service market commitments 
also represent the highest levels among the two 
sides’ agreements with their free trade partners. The 
CCFTA is expected to also attract more foreign 
investors, especially Chinese ones, to the country.

Sluggish 
property 
development 
activity 
continued, 
but 
the 
occupancy rate improved

A partial recovery of the travel and tourism 
sector has improved economic prospects of 
tourism-related construction activity, despite 
continued sluggish property development 
activity. Staycations among domestic tourists 
continue to initially support the occupancy rate.6 
This helped stabilize and cushion sales prices and 
rents of affordable and midrange condominiums. 
The occupancy rate is recovering as the tourism 
sector and domestic economic activity continue to 
sustain a gradual recovery. Affordable hotels 
experienced a recovery as budget tourists and 
business travelers seem to have returned. Demand 
for centrally owned office supply stabilized, with an 
occupancy rate of 70 percent in the second quarter 
of 2022 as face-to-face interactions picked up. 
Retail supply improved, with an occupancy rate 
also of 70 percent. 
 
However, 
property 
development 
activity 
continues to suffer from excess supply, with 
reduced foreign investor appetite for investing in 
property 
development 
projects. 
Reflecting 
continued sluggish demand in the property and real

Approved FDI project value picked up. 
Approved Qualified Investment Project (QIP) 
value in the real sector accelerated and continued 
to be diversified. Approved QIP value reached 
US$4.0 billion, increasing by 260 percent y/y 
during the first 8 months of 2022, of which 
(approved) FDI accounted for US$1 billion, or an 
87.4 percent y/y increase (figure 6). Chinese FDI 
accounted for about 90 percent of total approved 
FDI 
project 
value. 
Reflecting 
continued 
diversification, approved project investment value 
in the non-garment sector reached US$3.4 billion 
or 85.6 percent of total investment, up from 
US$778 million or 70.3 percent during the same 
period last year. The logistics and hospitality sectors 
received US$1.3 billion and US$129 million, 
respectively. Investment in the energy sector 
(hydropower plant) accounted for US$389.4 
million. Other investment projects include building 
material, healthcare, auto assembly, solar panels, 
and electronics. Approved project investment value 
in the garment and agriculture sectors also rose to

After a strong initial recovery, global economic growth is expected to slow precipitously from 5.7 percent in 2021 
to 2.9 percent in 2022.a Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and its effects on commodity markets, supply chains, inflation, 
and financial conditions have steepened the slowdown in global growth. In advanced economies, where activity is 
being dampened by high energy prices and significant tightening of financial conditions, growth is projected to 
decelerate from 5.1 percent in 2021 to 2.6 percent in 2022. Growth in emerging market and developing economies 
(EMDEs) is projected to slow from 6.6 percent in 2021 to 3.4 percent in 2022.

Quarterly global output growth has slowed considerably since the beginning of this year. The global composite 
output Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) fell into contraction territory in August 2022 (figure B1.1, panel A). 
Global goods trade has been particularly weak, reflecting softening demand for industrial goods across several large 
economies and continued trade disruptions associated with the war.b At 47.3, the global PMI Manufacturing New 
Export Orders Index remained in negative territory in August, recording the sixth straight month of contraction. 
Many EMDEs, particularly commodity importers, show signs of decelerating activity.

Global inflation has increased to multidecade highs. Inflation is above target in almost all countries that have 
adopted inflation targeting. Although some of the commodity prices have reverted to the pre-war level, inflation is 
persistent across regions and especially in advanced economies and Europe and Central Asia (figure B1.1, panel B). 
Higher food and energy prices, supply constraints in many sectors, and a rebalancing of pent-up demand have 
driven up headline inflation. But underlying core inflation has also increased, reflecting the pass-through of cost 
pressures through supply chains and tight labor markets, especially in advanced economies. In response, central 
banks are withdrawing monetary support and raising policy interest rates faster than previously expected. The 
resulting rise in borrowing costs and tighter global financial conditions have led to precipitous declines in equity 
prices, capital withdrawal from emerging markets, and currency depreciation against the U.S. dollar, inducing 
balance sheet valuation losses among economies with dollar-denominated debt.

Growth in the East Asia and Pacific region is projected to decelerate to 3.2 percent in 2022 as slower growth in 
China more than offsets a rebound in the rest of the region.c China’s GDP is projected to grow by 2.8 percent in 
2022, more slowly than the rest of the region for the first time since 1990. Growth in the rest of the region is 
projected to accelerate in 2022. The robust recovery of private consumption in the first half of 2022, the sustained 
demand for exports of manufactured goods and commodities, and the limited tightening so far of fiscal and 
monetary policy allowed strong growth of the region excluding China.

The current global environment is highly unfavorable for EMDEs. Global growth is slowing sharply, financial 
conditions are tightening, and inflation has soared in many countries. The world’s three major engines of growth—
the United States, the euro area, and China—are all expected to experience a protracted period of weakness. If 
persistently high inflation prompts even more monetary policy tightening in advanced economies, or if the dollar 
continues to strengthen, EMDEs are likely to face further tightening of global financial conditions, in parallel with 
a slowdown in global growth, and alongside continued shockwaves from the war in Ukraine, which together lead 
to the risk of severe financial stress in EMDEs.

estate market, approved construction permit value 
contracted by 54 percent (figure 7) during the first 
8 months of 2022. Similarly, approved construction 
permit area contracted by 53 percent y/y. During 
the same period, the volume of total basic 
construction materials including cement, steel, and 
other construction material imports (in metric tons) 
mainly used for the construction industry 
contracted by 10.1 percent y/y (figure 8). 
 
Prospects for the construction and real estate 
sector remain uncertain even after the 
pandemic ends. It is unlikely that construction 
will once again be a main engine of economic 
growth in the near future, despite a continued 
recovery of the travel and tourism industries (see 
more discussion on the tourism sector below). For 
several years preceding the crisis, Cambodia 
experienced an unprecedented construction and 
real estate boom, which created excess supply. 
External demand for the country’s commercial and 
residential property partly contributed to the boom. 
Sihanoukville was one of Cambodia’s urban centers 
that experienced the most rapid construction boom 
during the pre-pandemic period, with an influx of 
Chinese investment due to a prospect of a high 
investment return from tourism activities backed 
by a short-lived casino industry. The seaside 
provincial capital of Sihanoukville received US$5.8 
billion of approved construction projects in 2019–
20. The pandemic and then China’s zero-COVID-
19 policy continue to curtail construction and real 
estate activity.

The travel and tourism industry, which was 
initially backed by a recovery of domestic travel 
and tourism, is now supported by increased 
international arrivals (figure 9). Arrivals have 
been facilitated by the reinstatement of the Visa on 
Arrival program, and removal in March 2022 of the 
requirement for a negative COVID-19 PCR test 
and, recently, for vaccination records, before arrival 
in Cambodia. Total international arrivals quickly 
improved, reaching 1.26 million during the first 9 
months of 2022, although the number remained 
well below the 4.81 million visitors received during 
the same period in 2019. However, a recovery of 
foreign tourists visiting Siem Reap, the largest 
tourist attraction site in the country was relatively 
slow. Arrivals by air at Siem Reap accounted for a 
mere 5.5 percent (70,000 tourists) of the total, well 
below 29.1 percent (1.27 million tourists) received 
during the same period in 2019. Similarly, revenue 
from Angkor Wat entrance fees only marginally 
improved (figure 10), reaching US$5.3 million, 
compared to US$74.3 million during the same 
period in 2019. 
 
In addition, China’s zero-COVID policy may 
affect the recovery of the tourism sector. During 
Figure 7. Approved construction permit value

decisions to manage the process of formulation, 
promotion, and commercialization of tourism 
products.

Floods 
may 
affect 
agricultural 
production, amid slow cultivation

Recent floods affected about 7 percent of rice 
crops in Cambodia’s 22 provinces, especially 
Banteay Meanchey, Battambang, and Pursat. The 
authorities conducted an assessment of the damage 
caused by the floods in order to provide assistance 
such as seeds for replanting after the floods recede. 
The damage caused is compounded by the oil price 
shock, which has resulted in elevated prices of fuel, 
fertilizer, and pesticide. These negative impacts 
together with Cambodia’s structural bottlenecks—
high logistics and energy costs—do not bode well 
for this year’s agricultural performance and exports. 
 
As of July 2022, wet season rice cultivation was 
slow. It reached 2.2 million hectares, or an 11.8 
percent y/y decline.8 Harvesting of (short-duration 
varieties) wet season rice, however, accelerated, 
producing a total of 0.48 million metric tons, or a 
20.7 percent y/y increase, with an average yield of 
4.2 metric tons per hectare. 
 
Non-rice agricultural production during the 
first seven months of 2022 was mixed, affected 
by price volatility. The major non-rice agricultural 
products are rubber and cassava, ranked second 
and third in terms of product value and exports, 
after rice. Rubber plantation covers 404,000

Improved confidence supported a recovery of 
domestic 
consumption, 
despite 
elevated 
inflation. Consumption, which accounts for about 
three-quarters of GDP, has been boosted by 
improved consumer confidence as efforts to 
contain COVID-19 infections paid off. Imports of 
consumer and durable goods have recovered since 
the second quarter of 2022 (figure 12). During the 
first 8 months of 2022, quantity imports of 
consumer goods such as beer, garment, and 
gasoline accelerated, growing at 39.6 percent, 8.8 
percent, and 21.4 percent, respectively, y/y. 
Similarly, quantity imports of durable goods such 
as passenger cars and motorcycles rose to 53.9 
percent and 32.3 percent y/y during the same 
period. Other imported goods such as foodstuff 
and electronics, which sharply contracted before 
the reopening up of the economy and the lifting of 
travel restrictions, have stabilized. The revival of 
domestic consumption has also helped underpin a 
gradual recovery of the services sector, especially 
the wholesale, retail, travel, and tourism industries.

The food and oil price shock caused 
inflation to surge

Cambodia’s Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
surged, led by rising food and oil prices 
triggered by the Russia-Ukraine war. Headline 
inflation, however, marginally eased to 4.9 percent 
y/y in August 2022, after surging to 7.8 percent, a 
13-year high in June 2022, caused largely by rapidly 
rising prices of food and petroleum products 
(figure 13). Given the fact that the food component 
Figure 11. Unlike rice, rubber and cassava

(subindex) captures a 43 percent weight of the 
inflation basket, excluding food, inflation reached 
only 2.6 percent y/y in August 2022, up from 1.5 
percent in August 2021. During the same period, 
the food subindex rose to 2.4 percentage points, up 
from 1.9 percentage points, driven largely by rising 
prices of rice, beef, chicken, fish, and fresh fruits. 
Similarly, the contribution of the housing (and 
utilities) subindex increased to 0.6 percentage 
points, up from 0.3 percentage points, as the cost 
of housing maintenance and repair materials 
soared, reflecting spillovers from the oil price 
shock. 
Similarly, 
combined 
subindexes 
of 
communication, recreation, education, restaurant, 
and others, contributed 1.3 percentage points in 
August 2022, up from 0.4 percentage points during 
the same period last year. The contribution of the 
transport subindex, however, remained at 0.7 
percentage points, despite continued elevated oil 
prices. 
 
The spillover effects of the food and oil price 
shock caused rising costs of other goods, labor, 
and fees. The CPI of selected goods that include 
household 
furnishing 
goods, 
construction 
materials, and appliances almost doubled, reaching 
4.3 percent in August 2022, up from 2.3 percent in 
August 2021 (figure 14). Similarly, the spillover 
effects of the shock caused rising labor costs. 
Inflation of selected types of labor (services), 
including housing maintenance, cleaning and

repair, and medical/personal care, tripled, reaching 
3.4 percent, up from 1.2 percent during the same 
period last year. Inflation of selected fees, which 
include 
utilities, 
transport, 
education, 
and 
recreation, almost doubled, reaching 5.3 percent, 
up from 2.4 percent during the same period last 
year. Cambodia imports 100 percent of its 
petroleum products. The fuel products it imports 
also account for a relatively large proportion of 
GDP (6.2 percent), suggesting that price rises may 
have a comparatively larger impact on economic 
activity, weighing on household budgets. While the 
income effects hit consumer demand, higher input 
costs constrain production. (See also the Special 
Focus section below, entitled “Poverty and 
Distributional Impact of Inflation in Cambodia.”) 
 
Given that the economy is highly dollarized, it 
is important to differentiate impacts of the food 
and oil price shock on purchasing power of 
those who hold U.S. dollar-denominated assets 
(that is, those who earn income in U.S. dollars) and 
those who hold riel-denominated assets (those who 
earn income in riel). The current inflation rate of 
4.9 percent y/y in August 2022 is in local currency 
terms. With the marginal depreciation of the local 
currency vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar exchange rate, the 
computed inflation rate in U.S. dollar terms was 4.2 
percent y/y in August 2022,9 below the inflation 
rate of 4.9 percent in local currency terms. If a 
sharp local currency depreciation occurs, the oil

9 Inflation in U.S. terms is defined as the ratio of the changes of CPI 
indexes to the changes of the riel vs. U.S. dollar exchange rate indexes. 
The riel vis-à-vis U.S. dollar exchange rate is first indexed, using the 
same base year as that of CPI. If the riel vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar 
exchange rate indexes are unchanged, the computed inflation in U.S. 
dollar terms is equal to inflation in local currency terms. As the local

currency depreciates against the U.S. dollar, the index of the riel vis-à-
vis the U.S. dollar exchange rate increases, and the ratio of the changes 
of CPI indexes to changes of the exchange rate indexes decrease. 
Inflation in U.S. dollar terms is, in this case, lower than that in local 
currency terms.

and food price shock will harm the purchasing 
power of those who earn income in riel more. 
Given that Cambodia’s economy is highly 
dollarized, and the riel has been largely pegged to 
the dollar, rising inflation in the United States has 
led to rising domestic price pressures, which often 
results in “imported” inflation.

narrowed to an estimated 11.2 percent of GDP in 
the first half of 2022 (figure 15) and is projected to 
reach 25 percent of GDP in 2022. 
The exchange rate is also being affected by 
tightening global financial conditions. Central 
banks, including the U.S. Federal Reserve, continue 
to hike interest rates to keep rapid inflation from 
becoming entrenched (see the monetary section 
below for more discussion on rising interest rates). 
Financing the current account deficit is therefore 
being constrained by slower capital inflows. As a 
result of interventions to stabilize the currency, 
Cambodia’s gross international reserves declined 
marginally to US$18.4 billion (about 8 months of 
imports) in August 2022, down from US$20.2 
billion at the end of 2021.

The current account improved in the first half 
of 2022 as the trade deficit narrowed, according 
to the central bank’s balance of payments data.10 
Cambodia’s goods export growth accelerated, 
surpassing its pre-pandemic growth rate. In the first 
8 months of 2022, merchandise exports surged, 
growing at 28.6 percent y/y, driven largely by 
exports of main manufacturing products, namely 
garment, travel goods, and footwear, which grew at 
30.3 percent y/y. Merchandise imports growth 
eased to 18.3 percent y/y. This led to temporary 
improvements in the trade balance. Gold imports 
during the first 8 months remained strong, reaching 
US$4.2 billion, or an 11.2 percent y/y increase. 
With a broad-based improvement in economic 
activity including some recovery of the travel and 
tourism industry, net services also improved. In the 
first half of 2022, the net exports of services 
amounted to US$746 million (2.5 percent of GDP), 
up from US$311 million (1.1 percent of GDP) in 
2021. As a result, the current account deficit

In the East Asia and Pacific (EAP) region, 
Cambodia is among a few countries that are 
heavily dependent on fuel imports. The 
country’s refined oil imports amounted to 6.2 
percent of 2021 GDP—larger than in most other 
EAP economies—and around 11 percent of total 
imports. Caused by the oil price shock, the 
country’s terms of trade have worsened. To cope 
with the worsening terms of trade, imports of diesel 
and fertilizer shrank. During the first 8 months of 
2022, the quantity of diesel and fertilizer imports 
declined by 19 percent and 31.3 percent y/y, 
respectively (figure 16). As agricultural machinery is

run by diesel, while agricultural cultivation needs 
fertilizer and pesticides, the decline of diesel and 
fertilizer imports does not bode well for this year’s 
agricultural production. As discussed in the 
agriculture section above, this year’s rice cultivation 
is already slower than last year’s.

British pound. The appreciation of the riel against 
currencies of its trading partners such as Vietnam 
and 
Thailand 
erodes 
Cambodia’s 
external 
competitiveness.

Cambodia’s central bank, the National Bank of 
Cambodia (NBC), continued to maintain a 
reserve requirement ratio of 7 percent for both 
riel and U.S. dollar deposits and borrowing. The 
NBC, 
however, 
ended 
forbearance 
on 
restructurings from July this year. Driven by the 
easing of foreign currency deposits (FCDs), broad 
money (M2) growth decelerated to 12.0 percent y/y 
in August 2022, down from 16.1 percent during the 
same period last year (figure 18). Of the 12.0 
percent broad money growth, the contributions of 
foreign currency deposits (and other deposits), 
transferrable deposits, and currency in circulation 
accounted for 11.6 percentage points, 1.1 
percentage points, and -0.8 percentage points, 
respectively, down from 12.2 percentage points, 2.4 
percentage points, and 1.5 percentage points, 
respectively, during the same period last year.

To curb rising domestic inflation in the U.S., 
the U.S. Federal Reserve (the Fed) raised 
interest rates (figure 17). The Fed introduced a 
federal funds rate hike of 0.75 percentage points to 
a range of 3 percent to 3.25 percent in September 
2022.11 Tightening global financial conditions and 
deterioration of Cambodia’s terms of trade put 
increased pressure on the exchange rate. While 
pegged within the targeted ±2 percent range, the 
nominal exchange rate depreciated, reaching 4,150 
riels per U.S. dollar in October 2022, down from 
4,074 riels per U.S. dollar during the same period 
last year. As the riel is pegged to the U.S. dollar, 
which 
is 
appreciating, 
the 
local 
currency 
appreciated against the currencies of several of 
Cambodia’s main trading partners. The riel/Thai 
baht exchange rate appreciated, reaching 113 riel 
per baht, down from 126 riel per baht. The 
riel/Chinese yuan exchange rate appreciated to 595 
riel per yuan, down from 631 riel per yuan. The 
riel/Vietnamese dong exchange rate appreciated to 
0.175 riel per dong, down from 0.179 riel per dong. 
The riel also appreciated against the euro and the

The easing of FCD growth likely reflects 
decelerated capital inflows. For many years, 
FCDs have been considered a proxy for capital 
inflows. Tightening global financial conditions and 
China’s zero-COVID policy may have been 
curtailing capital inflows to Cambodia. As capital

While remaining strong, domestic credit 
growth decelerated to 22.7 percent y/y in 
August 2022, down from 26.2 percent during 
the same period last year (figure 19). 
Concentration 
of 
domestic 
credit 
in 
the 
construction and real estate sector continued 
despite the easing of construction activity after the 
construction boom stalled. As of August 2022, of 
total bank credit growth, the contribution of 
construction, real estate, and mortgages combined 
rose to 40 percent, up from 36 percent during the 
same period last year. While all major (real) 
indicators (approved construction permits and 
imports of construction materials) point to the 
easing of construction and real estate activity, 
domestic credit financing the construction, real 
estate, and mortgage sectors expanded. This may 
indicate increased property speculation activity. 
Reflecting a recovery of domestic economic 
activity, 
the 
contribution 
of 
lending 
to 
wholesale/retail and agriculture to credit growth 
rose to 27 percent and 11 percent, respectively, in 
August 2022, up from 24 percent and 8 percent, 
respectively, during the same period last year. The 
credit-to-GDP ratio increased further, to 171 
percent in August 2022, up from 158 percent 
during the same period last year.

inflows decelerate, injection of local currency into 
circulation is increasingly constrained, given that 
the economy remains highly dollarized. The 
contribution of (local) currency in circulation to 
broad money growth, therefore, declined to 
negative 0.8 percentage points in August 2022, 
down from 1.5 percentage points during the same 
period last year. The negative contribution of local 
currency in circulation to broad money growth may 
also reflect interventions by the central bank in the 
foreign exchange market by injecting U.S. dollars. 
 
To mitigate the impact of the pandemic on 
borrowers, the central bank allowed banks and 
microfinance institutions (MFIs) to restructure 
loans. By mid-2022, 268,042 borrower accounts 
(8.1 percent of total borrower accounts) amounting 
to US$4.5 billion (8.6 percent of total outstanding 
credit) provided by the banking sector to the 
private sector had been restructured.12 Of the total 
US$4.5 
billion 
in 
restructured 
loans, 
the 
construction, tourism, transport and logistics, and 
garment sectors accounted for US$0.82 billion 
(18.6 percent), US$0.71 billion (16.0 percent), 
US$0.21 billion (4.9 percent), and US$0.13 billion 
(3.1 percent), respectively. The other sectors 
accounted for the remaining US$2.5 billion (57.5 
percent).

Reserve and the European Central Bank13 
raised interest rates, put upward pressure on 
domestic interest rates in Cambodia. Rising 
funding costs for banks and financial institutions in 
Cambodia pushed up operating costs of banks and 
MFIs, requiring them to increase interest rates on 
loans. Weighted average interest rates of U.S. 
dollar-denominated term deposits and loans rose to 
4.4 percent and 9.39 percent per year, respectively, 
up from 3.51 percent and 9.0 percent, respectively, 
during the same period last year (figure 20). 
Similarly, weighted average interest rates of local 
currency-denominated term deposits and loans 
rose to 6.78 percent and 11.59 percent per year, 
respectively, up from 5.26 percent and 10.33 
percent, respectively, during the same period last 
year. The prospect of a protracted period of high 
inflation and a sharp increase in global interest rates 
has significant implications for Cambodia.

Deposit growth eased, expanding at 14.2 
percent y/y in August 2022, compared to 16.1 
percent during the same period last year. The easing 
of domestic deposits may have compelled banks 
and MFIs to raise interest rates on deposits to 
attract depositors. The loan-to-deposit ratio 
continued to increase, reaching 134.7 percent in 
August 2022, up from 125.3 percent during the 
same period last year. As the demand for credit 
increased, some banks continued to lend, regardless 
of the domestic deposits they received, because 
they obtained funding abroad. However, with the 
tightening global financial conditions, borrowing 
costs from abroad increase, pushing up domestic 
borrowing costs. By mid-2022, the reported overall 
nonperforming loan ratios remained low at 2.6 
percent and 2.3 percent for the banking and 
microfinance sectors, respectively.14 However, this 
may not fully reflect declining asset quality, due to 
extensive loan restructuring allowed during the 
height of the COVID-19 pandemic. Cambodia’s 
high private debt raises concerns about the drag on 
the economy if borrowers struggle to meet 
repayments.

While the spillover effects from a slowdown in 
the real sector to the financial sector have not 
yet been sizable, the tapering of capital inflows 
triggered by tightening global financial conditions, 
and China’s zero-COVID policy is affecting 
property prices. Outstanding bank credit provided 
to combined construction, real estate, and 
mortgage activities rose to US$14.5 billion (48 
percent of GDP) by July 2022, up from US$7.9 
billion (28.6 percent of GDP) by end-2019. A real 
estate market correction may have started, which is 
likely to increase NPLs in this segment. High credit 
growth and concentration of domestic credit in the 
construction and real estate sector remain a key risk 
to Cambodia’s macrofinancial stability.

Domestic revenue collection quickly 
recovered

A broad-based economic recovery and revenue 
administration improvements underpinned an 
across-the-board improvement in domestic 
revenue collection. Domestic revenue growth 
fully recovered to pre-COVID-19 levels. During 
the first 8 months of 2022, central government 
revenue, which accounts for 92.1 percent of total 
domestic revenue, surged, reaching 16,712 billion 
riels (US$4.08 billion) or 23.8 percent y/y, driven

The 
economy 
remains 
highly 
leveraged

A rising credit-to-GDP ratio, which reached 171 
percent in August 2022, reflects a rapid buildup 
of private debt (see box 2 for a discussion on 
private debt). Credit growth has far exceeded

largely by buoyant tax revenue (figure 21). Tax 
revenue grew at 24.6 percent y/y, amounting to 
15,392 billion riels (US$3.75 billion), thanks mainly 
to better collection of both taxes on goods and 
services (indirect taxes) and direct revenue (direct 
taxes). Although Cambodia’s domestic revenue 
continued to depend on taxes on goods and 
services, comprising mainly the value-added tax 
(VAT) and excises, direct revenue improved 
steadily in recent years. The share of direct revenue 
to total tax revenue rose to 40.4 percent during the 
first 8 months of 2022, up from 27.1 percent during 
the same period in 2019, propelled by a rapid 
expansion of profit taxes, which grew by 25.9 
percent. Improvements in tax collection continued, 
thanks 
to 
better 
tax 
administration 
and 
modernization, with the introduction of e-filing, e-
payment, and better taxpayer services. Efforts have 
been made to eliminate loopholes in the Law on 
Taxation and to harmonize the legal framework to 
prevent fiscal evasion, transfer pricing abuses, and 
double taxation.15

first 8 months of 2022, up from 17.5 percent during 
the same period in 2019. However, implementation 
of the newly introduced Law on Investment, which 
is more generous than the old law, will likely have a 
negative impact on profit tax collection. Direct 
revenue is expected to be further boosted if a 
personal income tax is finally introduced. There is 
no personal income tax, per se, in Cambodia. 
Instead, a monthly salary tax is imposed on 
individuals 
who 
derive 
income 
from 
employment.16 The monthly salary tax, which has 
been implemented for decades, remains relatively 
small. Due to the absence of personal income tax, 
Cambodia’s direct revenue as a share of total 
revenue remained relatively low, reaching only 25.0 
percent in 2020, compared to 30.1 percent in 
Thailand, 36.6 percent in the Philippines, and 45.2 
percent in Malaysia. The second largest revenue 
component is the VAT. During the first 8 months 
of 2022, VAT revenue grew by 24.6 percent, 
amounting 4,684 billion riels (US$1.14 billion). 
However, the share of VAT remains stable at 28 
percent of total domestic revenue. Large taxpayers 
contributed about 80 percent of total tax revenue.17 
Despite increased commitments under bilateral and 
regional 
free 
trade 
agreements, 
taxes 
on 
international trade also grew, expanding at 22.4 
percent y/y. Nontax revenue, driven largely by 
travel and tourism activity and hit hard during the 
pandemic, also improved, rising 16.1 percent y/y. 
During the first 8 months of 2022, domestic 
revenue collected by the two main revenue 
agencies—the General Department of Taxation,

Profit tax is now the largest 
component of domestic revenue

In 2022, profit tax collection rose quickly, 
exceeding VAT collection for the first time. 
During the first 8 months of 2022, profit tax 
collection grew by 25.9 percent, reaching 4,725.5 
billion riels (US$1.15 billion) (figure 22). Boosted 
by profit tax collection, the share of direct revenue 
in domestic revenue rose to 28.3 percent during the

which is responsible mainly for collecting domestic 
taxes, and the General Department of Customs and 
Excise, which is in charge of collecting largely 
trade-related taxes—accounted for 50.1 percent 
and 41.9 percent of domestic revenue, respectively. 
Strong performance of domestic tax collection is 
attributed to good tax administration, tax system 
modernization, and good corporate governance.18

only 1,531 billion riels (US$0.37 billion) during the 
first 8 months of 2022, down from 2,163.4 billion 
riels (US$0.53 billion) during the same period last 
year. Wages and compensation grew marginally, 
increasing by 2.0 percent, reaching 5,088 billion 
riels (US$1.24 billion). Wages and compensation 
remained contained as public sector salaries have 
been frozen since 2021 to save budgetary funds to 
meet rising pandemic-related spending demand. In 
July 2022, while planning to introduce additional 
assistance programs, the authorities extended the 
cash transfer programs to the end of 2022 to 
address the negative impacts of the food and oil 
price shock, as well as the ongoing effects of the 
pandemic. The program benefits approximately 
706,060 households (2.8 million individuals) or 17 
percent of the population. Launched in June 2020, 
as of October 2022, the program had disbursed 
US$837.05 million (about 2.7 percent of GDP).

Budget 
expenditure 
gradually 
decelerated 
amid 
fiscal 
consolidation efforts

The fiscal deficit is expected to 
narrow, but remains relatively large 
at 4.6 percent of GDP

Thanks 
to 
improved 
collection 
and 
consolidated expenditure, the fiscal deficit is 
expected to narrow, reaching 4.6 percent of 
GDP in 2022 (figure 24). Revenue, including 
grants, is rapidly improving and is projected to 
reach 22.8 percent of GDP in 2022, boosted largely 
by buoyant tax revenue, thanks to economic 
recovery and continued revenue administration

improvements. Expenditure is expected to decline 
to 27.4 percent of GDP as expenditure on goods 
and services and capital expenditure are moderating 
as some pandemic-induced spending such as 
COVID-19-related health expenditures have been 
phased out.

The fiscal deficit is projected to be largely 
financed by external funds. External financing is 
expected to account for about 90 percent of the 
financing gap (see more discussion on loan 
disbursements in the public debt section below). 
The remaining 10 percent is expected to be 
financed by a drawdown of government deposits 
(fiscal reserves), which stood at 17.1 percent of 
GDP by August 2022, down from 23.7 percent at 
the end of 2020.

By mid-2022, Cambodia’s public debt-to-GDP 
ratio reached 32.3 percent or US$9.7 billion in 
outstanding debt (table 1),19 of which 68 percent 
is owed to bilateral creditors and 32 percent to 
multilateral creditors. Triggered by the pandemic, 
Cambodia’s debt accumulation picked up amid 
slow revenue collection and rising demand for 
health and social assistance spending, resulting in a 
widening financing gap. To finance the gap, the 
country’s public debt, which consists almost solely 
of external debt, rose quickly to 32.5 percent of 
GDP in mid-2022, up from 28.2 percent in 2019. 
Cambodia’s largest official creditor is China. Total 
debt owed to China reached US$4.04 billion, or 
41.5 percent of total debt stock by mid-2022. 
Cambodia’s second largest creditor is the Asian

Total loan disbursements rose to US$848.7 
million during the first half of 2022, up from 
US$578.71 million during the same period last 
year. The amount of disbursement (US$848.7 
million) made during the first half of 2022 already 
exceeded the total disbursement (US$829.7 
million) for all of 2019. The authorities have been 
filling the pandemic-induced widening financing 
gap primarily with rising proceeds from loan 
disbursements, supplemented by drawdowns of 
government deposits (fiscal reserves). More 
importantly, the authorities continue to follow the

COVID-19 related spending. Inflation is expected 
to decelerate to 4.2 percent and 3.8 percent in 2023 
and 2024, respectively. The external account sees 
further improvement through relatively resilient 
exports. Poverty is expected to decline due to the 
projected economic recovery and moderate 
inflation. 
 
Over the medium term, the economy is 
expected to trend back to potential, growing at 
around 6 percent. The tourism and hospitality 
industries are likely to accelerate further, with 
projected increases in international arrivals and 
domestic tourists once the pandemic is behind us. 
Agricultural 
production 
and 
agroprocessing 
industries continue to be boosted by newly ratified 
free trade agreements. In addition to the 
Cambodia-China Free Trade Agreement (CCFTA) 
and the Regional Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership (RCEP), which have been effective 
since January 2022, the Cambodia-Republic of 
Korea Free Trade Agreement (CKFTA) will be 
effective from December 2022. The travel, 
transport, and logistics industry should be boosted 
by strong investment in several key infrastructure 
projects such as a newly built expressway linking 
Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville, where a deep-sea 
port is located; a new logistics complex and 
multimodal port development project in Kampot; 
and a new expressway project linking Phnom Penh 
to Bavet on the Cambodia-Vietnam border.

Cambodia’s real GDP growth projection has 
been revised up to 4.8 percent in 2022 on the 
back of a more broad-based economic recovery 
(table 2). The surge in manufacturing exports—
especially garment, footwear, travel goods, and 
bicycle manufacturing; the revival of the travel and 
tourism industries; and the return of FDI inflows 
have helped sustain this year’s economic recovery. 
Even though the economy is expected to further 
expand next year, supported by a recovery of 
domestic consumption as employment rates 
improve and inflation recedes, along with strong 
government consumption during an election year, 
real growth projection for 2023 has been 
downgraded to 5.2 percent due to the less favorable 
global outlook. 
 
In the short term, the fiscal balance is projected 
to continue to normalize on the back of 
stronger 
growth 
and 
better 
revenue 
administration. This is expected to result in 
buoyant revenue performance, while expenditure is 
expected to ease with the decline in demand for

Although the near-term growth outlook has 
improved marginally since April, risks are tilted to 
the downside. Global trade growth is projected to 
slow sharply in 2023 as the global economy faces 
strong headwinds. According to the World Trade 
Organization, world merchandise trade volume is 
expected to slow sharply to 1.0 percent in 2023, down 
from 3.5 percent in 2022. The dangers of inflation, slow 
growth, lower productivity, the drain on global energy 
supplies, and higher interest rates are impacting 
developing countries. Cambodia’s export-oriented 
manufacturing is vulnerable to an extended slowdown 
in the United States, Cambodia’s largest export market. 
Similarly, the slowdown in China, Cambodia’s largest 
source of foreign direct investment, if sustained, will 
negatively impact investment and capital inflows into 
the country. The European Union, Cambodia’s second 
largest export market, is facing significant downward 
risks amid high energy prices and inflation.

Global financial tightening has started to 
negatively impact the economy. Cambodia has been 
experiencing a deceleration of foreign currency deposit 
growth, reflecting the easing of capital inflows. There 
have been depreciation pressures on the riel/U.S. dollar 
exchange rate, which required interventions in the 
foreign exchange market and led to the decline in 
Cambodia’s gross international reserves. As pressures 
on domestic interest rates emerged, the country’s 
commercial real estate sector faced increased risks. 
 
If elevated energy prices linger, a further 
deterioration of the terms of trade will 
undermine 
consumer 
confidence 
and

corporate profitability, and potentially prevent 
the economy from reaching potential growth by 
2024. Further, intensifying geopolitical tensions, 
including a prolonged war in Ukraine, growing 
stagflationary headwinds, rising financial instability, 
continuing supply-side constraints, and worsening 
food insecurity all present serious risks to 
Cambodia’s projected path to economic recovery. 
Even though Cambodia maintains policy space that 
it could deploy should these risks materialize, its 
fiscal buffers have shrunk, after years of 
government fiscal intervention.

point to the importance of the ongoing efforts of 
dedollarization. 
 
Promoting the domestic economic sectors, 
with a focus on the travel, tourism, and 
hospitality industries, should help partly offset 
the 
deterioration 
of 
external 
demand 
conditions. In this regard, Cambodia must address 
key issues as indicated in the 2021 World Economic 
Forum’s Tourism and Travel Development Index, 
in which Cambodia was ranked 79th, compared to 
52nd for Vietnam and 36th for Thailand. Those 
issues include tourism service infrastructure, port 
infrastructure, environmental sustainability, and 
business environment. Despite a rapid expansion 
of the road network during the last several years, 
the country continues to exhibit insufficient 
connectivity to secondary destinations and last-mile 
road networks. There are several issues related to 
quality of services such as management (and 
provision) of waste and wastewater, piped clean 
water supply, and access to reliable electricity that 
need to be addressed. Those issues can only be 
resolved 
with 
improved 
destination-level 
management. In addition, successful facilitation of 
coherent private sector leadership of the sector 
should help create a “crowding-in” effect, 
anchored to comprehensive long-term plans, 
catalyzed by public seed funding. 
 
It is equally important to address supply chain 
constraints, which include high logistics and 
transportation costs to boost exports. The national 
logistics costs in Cambodia, estimated at 26.4 
percent of GDP in 2020, are significantly higher 
than in comparable Association of Southeast Asian 
Nation (ASEAN) countries such as Indonesia (22 
percent of GDP), Vietnam (20 percent of GDP), 
and Thailand (14.1 percent of GDP). To this end, 
it is necessary to address the high inventory cost in 
Cambodia by promoting access to finance and 
inventory management capabilities, while reducing 
transport costs by further facilitating trade. It is also 
essential to continue addressing supply-side 
bottlenecks by reducing the cost of energy, doing 
business, and licensing, especially for the exports 
sector, to revive external competitiveness.

With the recovery from COVID-19 still 
underway, Cambodia must now navigate 
through global economic headwinds. While 
demand for social assistance spending continues, the 
fiscal space has shrunk. To mitigate impacts of the oil 
and food price shock, the authorities are planning to 
introduce additional social assistance measures on top 
of the existing COVID-19 cash transfer program. 
Cambodia entered the pandemic with ample fiscal 
buffers, but the economic contraction in 2020 
combined with large (and protracted) spending on 
health and social assistance led to a substantial 
increase in the fiscal deficit and the debt level. Once 
the recovery becomes more entrenched, policies 
will need to shift towards consolidation to ensure 
fiscal sustainability and regain fiscal space. In this 
context, it is important to start broadening the tax 
base by introducing a personal income tax. Due 
mainly to the absence of a personal income tax, 
Cambodia’s direct revenue as a share of total 
domestic revenue remained relatively low at 25 
percent in 2020, compared to 30.1 percent in 
Thailand and 36.6 percent in the Philippines. 
 
Safeguarding financial stability is crucially 
important. The country’s commercial real estate 
sector faces increased risks as financial conditions 
tighten. It is crucial to closely monitor the current 
elevated credit growth, high levels of private debt, 
rising 
nonperformance 
loans, 
and 
the 
concentration of related risks in the construction 
and real estate sectors to ensure macrofinancial 
stability. To this end, it is important to safeguard 
the financial system with bank restructuring, 
corporate insolvency, deposit insurance, and debt 
restructuring regulations. There is a need to rein in 
the high credit growth and the concentration of 
credit in the real estate sector. Disruptions in the 
commercial real estate market could in turn 
potentially threaten financial stability through the 
connectedness of the sector with the financial 
system and the broader macroeconomy. Continued 
vigilance is warranted on the part of financial 
supervisors to mitigate such risks. In addition, 
negative impacts of global financial tightening

This Special Focus assesses the poverty and distributional impact of inflation in Cambodia, how impacts 
could be mitigated, and what it would cost to achieve desired distributional and poverty-limiting outcomes. 
The Special Focus concludes with recommendations to support an inclusive recovery.

High inflation comes at a time when Cambodian households are still recovering from the negative effects 
of the pandemic. Household finances for many Cambodians were already weakened with the pandemic, 
with negative effects borne largely by low-wage workers, informal workers, and low-income households. 
Soaring prices of food and fuel risk exacerbating poverty and vulnerability, especially when coping 
mechanisms have been eroded. Inflation, which peaked at 7.8 percent year on year (y/y) in June 2022, is 
starting to weigh on real incomes and the purchasing power of Cambodians.22 Hence it is crucial to 
understand the implications of inflation on the most vulnerable segments of the population and the 
measures that could be taken to alleviate ensuing economic hardships.

Cambodia has experienced higher rates of inflation in recent months, hitting a 13-year high in June 2022 
and breaking from past trends. At 7.8 percent in June 2022, inflation reached a rate last seen during the 
2008 global food crisis (figure S.1). Inflation has since eased, at least temporarily. Going forward, 
inflationary pressures will likely persist within the context of rising food and energy prices due to the 
prolonged war in Ukraine and recent oil production cuts by oil-producing nations.

As detailed in the first part of the report, rising global food and energy prices have driven high inflation. 
While food prices soared in early 2022, non-food inflation has outpaced food inflation, with rising transport 
costs and housing utilities being important contributors, reflecting higher global energy prices (see figure 
13 in part 1).

Prior to 2022, inflation in Cambodia remained low and mostly below 4 percent. In some periods, non-food 
inflation exceeded national headline inflation while in others food inflation exceeded national headline 
inflation (figure S.1). In 2020 when the country began grappling with the pandemic, food inflation lingered 
above national headline inflation. In 2022, in contrast, non-food inflation lingered above national headline 
inflation. These trends have distributional implications as is discussed later.

Sharply rising prices erode purchasing power (inflation-adjusted income) and potentially the ability of 
households to maintain their standard of living. The negative effects of high inflation on household welfare 
can be transmitted through declining purchasing power. The decline in purchasing power can be most acute 
when households’ nominal income (earnings or transfers) does not increase as much as prices (or do not 
adjust frequently). The negative impacts of high inflation can also be transmitted through its effects on 
asset prices, which could lead to a redistribution of wealth between debtors and creditors, depending on 
initial net asset positions.

While inflation reduces the purchasing power of all households, it can have differential effects across the 
income distribution. This is because households consume different shares of goods and services, and prices 
change at different paces for various goods and services. This implies that inflation will differ across 
households. Inflation will therefore inevitably reduce the purchasing power of some consumers more than 
others.

The ability of households to cope with high inflation depends on whether their nominal income can keep 
up or exceed rising household expenses due to inflation, as well as on the amount of savings they have to 
buffer against income fluctuations.

The welfare implications of rising prices depend crucially on household consumption patterns, employment 
profile, and asset profile. In this Special Focus, we examine primarily the inflation impacts through 
consumption.

We rely on the latest available national household expenditure data from the Cambodia Socio-Economic 
Survey (CSES) 2019/20 to examine the consumption patterns across income groups in Cambodia.23 The 
2019/20 data serve as a reasonable baseline for analysis as they are pre-COVID and do not capture the 
impact of the resulting economic crisis on household incomes and consumption, nor do they account for 
the large government fiscal response which provided targeted transfers to many households. In 2020, fiscal 
transfers targeted at poorer households cost around 0.7 percent of GDP and are estimated to have mitigated

four-tenths of the poverty impact from the pandemic that year.24 Spending on household transfers 
increased in 2021 to 1.4 percent of GDP, and while there are no poverty projections for this period, the 
poverty-reducing effect of the 2020 transfers combined with a doubling of budget in 2021 suggests that 
poverty in 2021 may well not be too different than in 2019, the baseline used here for analysis.25

Consumption patterns differ across income groups in Cambodia. Poorer households allocate a larger share 
of their budget to food, and richer households allocate more to non-food items (figure S.2). Accordingly, 
we would expect increasing food prices to have above-average effects on poor households and increasing 
non-food prices to have above-average effects on richer households. Since poorer households consume a 
larger share of food items, they are more likely to be vulnerable to food price increases. Conversely, richer 
households consume a larger share of non-food items and are more susceptible to non-food price increases.

While spending on energy appears low in comparison to other spending, this spending only reflects direct 
energy costs incurred by households for transportation, cooking, and other household purposes. However, 
energy prices are also embedded in food and other non-food expenditures due to transportation and other 
energy inputs at different stages of the supply chain.

While poor and rural Cambodian households spend about half of their budget on food, a sizeable 
proportion of food consumption is from own production, partially insulating them from food price 
increases. Rural farming households may even benefit from higher food prices if they lead to higher 
agricultural profits. The extent of agricultural profits would depend on whether higher revenues (from 
increasing output prices) offset higher input costs (from increasing fertilizer and other input costs). 
However, evidence of the positive relationship between food prices and agricultural income is mixed in the 
literature as Box S.1 highlights. Still, most of the food consumed by poor and rural Cambodian households 
is purchased, leaving them open to the effects of increasing food prices.

24 World Bank (forthcoming). 
25 The poverty rate in 2019/20 with the baseline data was 17.8 percent. Even if the government response did not fully 
mitigate the impact of the shock by 2021, the slope of the distribution in the range of 20-25 percent would be relatively 
similar to that of the baseline. Thus, while the poverty levels estimated in the current analysis could be biased 
downwards, the change in poverty estimated due to the shock and the mitigation from each policy response scenario 
should be relatively accurate.

Box S.1: Potential income effects of food prices 
 
Rising food prices can have positive income effects on households, particularly on households that are food 
producers. For these households, Deaton (1989) proposes that the first-order welfare effect of a price change of a 
food item is proportional to the difference between the production share of the food item and its consumption 
share in total household expenditures. This partial equilibrium approach has been widely used to simulate the 
welfare impact of food price shocks in developing countries (see, for example, World Bank, 2009; Anderson, Ivanic 
and Martin, 2014; and Ivanic, Martin and Zaman, 2012). 
 
Yet over the medium-term, a general equilibrium framework suggests that the income effect of rising food prices 
could extend to a broader population. In particular, agricultural laborers are expected to benefit. An increase in 
food prices raises production incentives, generating a higher demand for factors including labor, which then raises 
agricultural wages. Several studies find a positive relationship between rice prices and agricultural wages, with 
econometric estimates that suggest short-run wage elasticities between 0.25 and 0.69 and long-run elasticities 
between 0.47 and close to unity (Boyce and Ravallion (1991) and Palmer-Jones (1993) for Bangladesh; Lasco, Myers 
and Bernsten (2008) for the Philippines; and Headey (2016) for several developing countries). Furthermore, Jacoby 
(2016) considers broader labor market repercussions and finds a positive effect of rising crop prices on wages for 
manual labor in rural India, both within and outside agriculture. 
 
However, there are also studies that do not find a relationship between food prices and agricultural wages. For 
instance, even though Rashid (2002) finds a positive relationship between rice prices and agricultural wages for 
Bangladesh for the period between 1950 and 1989, he finds no relationship for a later period (between 1977 to 
1999). Hassan and Kornher (2022) also fail to find a relationship between food prices and agricultural wages for 
Bangladesh. In both studies the authors argue that urban wages have become a more influential factor in the 
determination of agricultural wages in the long-run amid increasing urban-rural integration. 
 
Source: Excerpt from World Bank (2022c).

To understand the effect of inflation across household income groups based on their unique consumption 
patterns, we combine household expenditure data from the Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey (CSES) 
2019/20 with the Consumer Price Index. We then trace monthly year-on-year inflation trends adjusting for 
decile-specific household consumption baskets from the time of survey to August 2022.

As is shown in figure S.3, not all households experience inflation equally at any point in time. Over the past 
two and a half years, some Cambodian households experienced inflation above the national headline 
inflation while others experienced inflation below the national headline inflation, reflecting differences in 
consumption patterns and inflation rates for the items they consume. During the early stages of the 
pandemic in 2020, food inflation in Cambodia exceeded national headline inflation (figure S.2), causing 
poorer households to face above-average losses in purchasing power. Since mid-2021, non-food price 
inflation has exceeded national headline inflation (figure S.2), causing richer households to face above-
average losses in purchasing power.

Total inflation faced by households from time of survey to August 2022 does not vary significantly across 
income groups (figure S.4). This is because higher inflation that was experienced by the poor in 2020 on 
account of higher food prices is now being offset by higher inflation experienced by the non-poor in 2021 
and 2022 (figure S.3). The consumption basket of better-off households is only marginally more expensive, 
reflecting the effect of higher inflation on non-food items in recent months. As of August 2022, the richest 
10 percent experienced inflation that was only 0.7 percentage points higher than that of the poorest 10 
percent. Since losses in purchasing power are similar across income groups, we would expect the impact 
on inequality to be limited (see figure S.13).

The urban and rural inflation rates adjusted for household consumption baskets, and the drivers 
underpinning the changes, are similar. However, it is hard to know exactly the urban-rural differences in 
inflation rates because a rural consumer price index is not available. In the absence of a rural price index, 
the Phnom Penh CPI was used to construct decile-specific inflation rates for rural households. This likely 
overestimates the rural price inflation as rural areas tend to face lower prices than urban areas for some

commodities. Hence, any urban and rural differences that we may observe are driven by differences in 
consumption shares.

Because the magnitude of inflation from 2019/20 to August 2022 is similar across income groups, welfare 
losses associated with inflation also do not vary substantially across income groups (figure S.5). If the 
analysis were to focus on the year 2020, the distributional effect would be more pronounced, with the poor 
experiencing a disproportionate burden. However, since the more recent episode of inflation is higher for 
non-food items, richer households are experiencing a higher burden.

While inflation reduces the real purchasing power of all households, poorer households will have a harder 
time coping. In general, poorer households have limited savings to draw on to smooth consumption when 
income or prices fluctuate. When they do have savings, it is crucial they do not draw on these meagre 
savings as it may further erode their coping mechanisms and have negative consequences on long-term 
investments in human capital. In contrast, richer households tend to have more liquid assets to buffer 
against these fluctuations. Further, the poor tend to hold most of their assets in cash rather than interest-
bearing assets and are therefore less likely to preserve the real value of their assets. In addition, poorer 
workers may have jobs where earnings do not grow quickly to outpace inflation, making it more difficult 
for them to preserve their purchasing power and to build savings.

Faced with a budget constraint, higher prices can lead the poor to reduce consumption and to change their 
consumption to less expensive and lower-quality goods. Higher prices may also lead the poor to withdraw 
children from school. As a consequence, inadequate spending on nutritious food, and withdrawal of 
children from schooling, can have detrimental long-term effects on human capital, causing losses in worker 
productivity and welfare, and disparities in income in the future.

The employment profile of workers across income groups highlights the types of jobs poor workers in 
Cambodia hold. Poorer workers in Cambodia typically have low-wage, low-productivity occupations, such 
as farming, where earnings do not grow as quickly as those in higher-productivity occupations and sectors. 
This makes poorer workers more vulnerable to their incomes not keeping pace with inflation.

The simulation analysis suggests that inflation alone could increase poverty 4 percentage points from the 
national poverty rate of 17.8 percent, measured in 2019/20 (figure S.9).28 The simulation analysis also 
suggests that the depth of poverty experienced by the population could increase, with the poverty gap 
increasing 1 percentage point, from 3.5 percent in 2019/20 (figure S.10).29 Note, the simulated poverty 
rates reported reflect a basic measure of felt poverty or some concept of economic welfare loss rather than 
what measured poverty would be in 2022 (see Box S.2). These simulated impacts do not account for 
implications of COVID-19 or for the fiscal policy response implemented between 2020 and 2022 to support 
households, thus care must be taken when interpreting the results (see Box S.2).

It is crucial to note that the simulated poverty rates reported in the Special Focus reflect a basic measure 
of felt poverty or some concept of economic welfare loss rather than what measured poverty would be in 
2022. Caution must be exercised in interpreting the results because of the following limitations:

For these reasons, especially the first one, measured poverty may have been lower than the estimates 
included here. Households may have switched to cheaper foods to get the same calories, increased income to 
compensate for higher prices through increased labor, or dipped into savings or borrowed from friends and family 
to maintain real consumption. While all of these responses may have reduced measured poverty impacts, they 
nonetheless have real costs: cheaper calories may have less micronutritional value, increased labor reduces leisure 
and may even come at the cost of children’s education, dissaving or borrowing reduces a household’s resilience and 
ability to cope with the next shock.

Cash transfers targeted to the poor on a national scale is relatively new to Cambodia. In 2019, cash transfers 
for pregnant women and children under age 2 were introduced, marking the first nationwide program 
although spending and coverage were small (Box S.3). During the pandemic, the government launched the 
“Cash Transfer Program for Poor and Vulnerable Households during COVID-19” (CTP-COVID). The 
program marked a significant and unprecedented scale-up in social assistance in terms of spending, scale of 
payments, and coverage (see Box S.3). The program partially mitigated welfare losses and food insecurity 
among families identified as poor in the IDPoor database.30

Box S.3: Social Assistance in Cambodia 
 
Social assistance in Cambodia pre-COVID 
Before the COVID-19 pandemic, social assistance was nascent in Cambodia, but it had some strong features that 
facilitated the quick expansion of assistance during the pandemic. Large-scale social assistance programs were 
lacking prior to 2019. Pre-2019 levels of social assistance were very low in global comparison—Cambodia spent 
around 0.09 percent of its GDP on social assistance. Initial social assistance programs were geared towards 
improving human capital and were mostly in the form of in-kind benefits.a The launch of the cash transfer for 
pregnant women and children under two years of age (CTP-PWYC) in June 2019 marked Cambodia’s first 
nationwide cash transfer program and a positive step towards providing greater social assistance. 
 
Social assistance during COVID 
To respond to the COVID-19 shock, the government launched the “Cash Transfer Program for Poor and 
Vulnerable Households during COVID-19” (CTP-COVID). The program marked a significant scale up of social 
assistance spending and coverage. Spending on cash transfers rose from less than 0.1 percent of GDP in 2019 to 
0.7 in 2020 and 1.4 in 2021. The program currently benefits nearly 700,000 households (or 20 percent of 
households) and has been extended through 2022. In 2019, only 2 percent of the households received the cash 
transfers through the program for pregnant women and children under two of age. 
 
To rapidly deploy emergency cash assistance, the government leveraged the existing IDPoor database of identified 
poor families as well as the implementation and delivery arrangements of the CTP-PWYC. IDPoor is the country’s 
official poverty identification and targeting mechanism used nationwide. The IDPoor program entitles families 
identified as poor access to range of services such as free health care and social transfers. 
 
Other forms of government assistance during COVID 
The cash transfer program was the largest component of the government’s support package during the pandemic 
but not the only support. The government also introduced other measures to mitigate the adverse pandemic effects 
on the economy and households including but not limited to:b

The scenarios presented here are hypothetical examples and do not reflect actions the government will take. 
Instead, the scenarios help to advance our understanding of how various forms of social assistance 
expansion could help the poor and most vulnerable. It is important to note that all scenarios are different 
potential targeted direct cash transfers, which have been a key component of the government’s response to 
cushion the economic impacts of both the pandemic and current inflation on poorer households. In 
addition, they are far more effective and efficient than alternative policies, notably subsidies. The recent 
World Bank (2022d) flagship on fiscal policy during the COVID-19 recovery found that targeted transfers: 
(i) benefit the poor much more;31 (ii) tend to have a larger impact on income growth than subsidies; (iii) 
can help households make crucial long-run investments—such as in educating children; and (iv) may also 
stimulate local economic activity and increase government revenue through higher indirect tax revenue in 
both the short and long run. Finally, the continued development of delivery systems for targeted social 
assistance can later facilitate broader tax reforms to generate more public revenues, as any burden of the

new taxes on poorer households is easily offset through the transfer system, costing just a fraction of the 
new revenues.

(ii) We then consider a vertical expansion of the program, where we increase the benefit level to existing

IDPoor beneficiaries. In the exercise, the benefit level is doubled, but other adjustments can also 
be explored.

(iii) We also consider a horizontal expansion of the program, where we expand the population coverage

(iv) Finally, we consider a scenario that focuses on expanding coverage to poor households and enrolling

them in the IDPoor program. These poor households (a) have per capita consumption that falls 
below the national poverty line and (b) are not enrolled in the IDPoor program. This scenario 
recognizes that poverty is dynamic in nature and not a static condition, and that households can 
fall in and out of poverty at various points in time.

A temporary expansion of social cash assistance would mitigate poverty

A temporary expansion of social cash assistance would either moderate or fully mitigate the poverty impact 
of inflation depending on the scope of the intervention. Providing cash transfers to existing IDPoor 
beneficiaries at the benefit level of the CTP-COVID would mitigate about half of the poverty impacts of 
inflation while fully mitigating further deprivation (figure S.12). This approach is beneficial to protect the 
poor from further destitution, but leaves room for improvement in terms of adequacy and coverage.

Expanding assistance, either through more generous benefits or greater population coverage, has potential 
for greater impact. Increasing the benefit level for existing IDPoor beneficiaries would help to further 
moderate the poverty impact of inflation, and would potentially lift people out of poverty depending on 
the level of generosity. Expanding the population coverage of the program to at-risk households also has 
the potential to fully mitigate the poverty impact of inflation. Finally, expanding coverage to poor 
households that may have recently fallen into poverty offers the greatest poverty mitigation.

A temporary expansion of social cash assistance would also reduce inequality. Because simulated effects of 
inflation on inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient were negligible (see figure S.13), providing 
income support to poor and vulnerable households would reduce inequality from the baseline by between 
0.9 percentage points and 1.6 percentage points. While inequality in Cambodia is moderate in international 
comparison, it must, however, be monitored in light of the uneven household impacts of the pandemic and 
uneven economic recovery.

What policy approach could be taken? This will depend on the goal to be achieved and the resources 
available, especially when fiscal tightening may be necessary. In this section, we evaluate the impact, cost, 
and cost-effectiveness of each scenario to compare one intervention against another.

Looking purely at the impact of interventions, continued expansions of assistance to poor households 
offers substantial poverty and inequality reduction. At the same time, this may require more resources than 
other options. To facilitate the comparison of interventions, we look at cost-effectiveness, which combines 
the cost and the outcome to evaluate how much it costs to gain a unit of poverty or inequality reduction 
(table S.1). Expanding the program to “newly poor” households (scenario 4) would be most cost-effective 
in mitigating poverty and deeper deprivation. In other words, it costs less to gain an additional percentage

point reduction in poverty than other interventions. Expanding the program to at-risk households (scenario 
3) offers the second most cost-effective way to mitigating poverty and deeper deprivation. While increasing 
the benefit level is more costly, it does provide substantial poverty alleviating benefits. Moreover, all four 
scenarios can be implemented in a temporary manner. For example, an initial one-off payment of three 
months could be made while the ongoing severity of inflation monitored to determine whether additional 
payments will alter be necessary (most countries using cash transfers have adopted this approach in 
responding to inflation; Gentilini et al. 2022). In this case, the fiscal cost is initially significantly lower (as 
indicated in the far right quarterly column of the table) and is around the same or less than the government 
is currently spending on energy subsidies.

How should policy be designed to reduce the impact of the inflation shock on the poor? The following 
section discusses policy options to address the negative impacts of the food and oil price shock.

First, it is crucial to protect the poor and vulnerable through a well-targeted and temporary 
expansion of social protection programs. Hence, it will be beneficial to:

• 
Continue to provide targeted income support to poor households, to ensure support is directed to 
those most in need and to maximize value for money.

• 
If resources allow, adjust the benefit level up to offset welfare losses until inflation is down.

• 
Strengthen the social protection system to be able to dynamically identify shock-affected 
households during times of crisis and expand social assistance coverage to households at-risk of 
falling into poverty.

Second, it is crucial to protect resources allocated to social safety nets and social services, 
especially when fiscal tightening may be necessary. Human capital is often the only asset the poor 
have to generate income and improve their quality of life; hence, it is imperative to protect the income of

poor households from income shocks, and to protect access to services, especially education and health 
care, that build their human capital and future earning potential. At the same time, the COVID-19 pandemic 
caused fiscal deficits to rise to 4.3 and 5.7 percent of GDP in 2020 and 2021, respectively, as lower economic 
activity and pandemic-related tax relief reduced total revenues, while total expenditures increased under the 
Government’s fiscal response program (which included subsidies and transfers, amounting to 2.9 percent 
of GDP in 2020). The fiscal deficit is projected to widen further in 2022 before narrowing in 2023–2024. 
While fiscal buffers remain relatively robust, increased attention to fiscal sustainability and resilience will be 
required to navigate the period ahead.

This may require some tradeoffs such as prioritizing temporary targeted income support to poor 
and vulnerable groups over, for example, energy subsidies or value-added tax (VAT) exemptions 
on food. Targeted cash transfers at a scale large enough to compensate for welfare losses is a more efficient 
way to deliver net benefits to poor and vulnerable households. This is because essentially everyone benefits 
from the subsidies or food tax exemptions, not just the poor. This implies much less efficient targeting of 
resources. In many cases, energy subsidies and exemptions can also be regressive as better-off households 
tend to consume higher shares of energy and spend more money on food, even if that amount represents 
a smaller share of their overall budget. In some scenarios, supporting households through subsidies and tax 
exemptions might have additional benefits, but faced with limited resources, the targeting of relief programs 
will be crucial for delivery of desired outcomes.

Finally, it would be beneficial to monitor inflation at a more spatially granular level to better 
understand the effects of inflation spatially, especially in rural areas where most of the poor reside. 
This would require strengthening price data collection in more remote parts of the country.

4/ The HDI ranking in 2001 is in relation to 175 countries and in 2010 in relation to 169 countries. Methodological enhancements in HDI calculations have resulted in notable improvements in the countries' rankings.