At its meeting on 30 January 2025, the Governing Council decided to lower the three 
key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In particular, the decision to lower the 
deposit facility rate – the rate through which the Governing Council steers the 
monetary policy stance – is based on its updated assessment of the inflation outlook, 
the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission.

The disinflation process is well on track. Inflation has continued to develop broadly in 
line with the December 2024 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the 
euro area and is set to return to the Governing Council’s 2% medium-term target in 
the course of 2025. Most measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will 
settle at around the target on a sustained basis. Domestic inflation remains high, 
mostly because wages and prices in certain sectors are still adjusting to the past 
inflation surge with a substantial delay. But wage growth is moderating as expected, 
and profits are partially buffering the impact on inflation.

The Governing Council’s recent interest rate cuts are gradually making new 
borrowing less expensive for firms and households. At the same time, financing 
conditions continue to be tight, also because monetary policy remains restrictive and 
past interest rate hikes are still transmitting to the stock of credit, with some maturing 
loans being rolled over at higher rates. The economy is still facing headwinds but 
rising real incomes and the gradually fading effects of restrictive monetary policy 
should support a pick-up in demand over time.

The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at 
its 2% medium-term target. It will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting 
approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, the 
Governing Council’s interest rate decisions will be based on its assessment of the 
inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. The Governing 
Council is not pre-committing to a particular rate path.

The economy stagnated in the fourth quarter of 2024, according to Eurostat’s 
preliminary flash estimate. It is set to remain weak in the near term. Surveys indicate 
that manufacturing continues to contract while services activity is expanding. 
Consumer confidence is fragile, and households have not yet drawn sufficient 
encouragement from rising real incomes to significantly increase their spending.

Nevertheless, the conditions for a recovery remain in place. While the labour market 
has softened over recent months it continues to be robust, with the unemployment 
rate staying low, at 6.3% in December. A solid job market and higher incomes should 
strengthen consumer confidence and allow spending to rise. More affordable credit 
should also boost consumption and investment over time. Provided trade tensions 
do not escalate, exports should support the recovery as global demand rises.

Fiscal and structural policies should make the economy more productive, competitive 
and resilient. The Governing Council welcomes the European Commission’s 
Competitiveness Compass, which provides a concrete roadmap for action. It is 
crucial to follow up, with further concrete and ambitious structural policies, on Mario 
Draghi’s proposals for enhancing European competitiveness and on Enrico Letta’s 
proposals for empowering the Single Market. Governments should implement their 
commitments under the EU’s economic governance framework fully and without 
delay. This will help bring down budget deficits and debt ratios on a sustained basis, 
while prioritising growth-enhancing reforms and investment.

Most underlying inflation indicators have been developing in line with a sustained 
return of inflation to the Governing Council’s medium-term target. Domestic inflation, 
which closely tracks services inflation, has remained high, as wages and some 
services prices are still adjusting to the past inflation surge with a substantial delay. 
At the same time, recent signals point to continued moderation in wage pressures 
and to the buffering role of profits.

The Governing Council expects inflation to fluctuate around its current level in the 
near term. It should then settle sustainably at around the 2% medium-term target. 
Easing labour cost pressures and the continuing impact of the Governing Council’s 
past monetary policy tightening on consumer prices should help this process. While 
market-based indicators of inflation compensation have largely reversed the declines 
observed in autumn 2024, most measures of longer-term inflation expectations 
continue to stand at around 2%.

The risks to economic growth remain tilted to the downside. Greater friction in global 
trade could weigh on euro area growth by dampening exports and weakening the 
global economy. Lower confidence could prevent consumption and investment from

recovering as fast as expected. This could be amplified by geopolitical risks, such as 
Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and the tragic conflict in the Middle East, 
which could disrupt energy supplies and further weigh on global trade. Growth could 
also be lower if the lagged effects of monetary policy tightening last longer than 
expected. It could be higher if easier financing conditions and falling inflation allow 
domestic consumption and investment to rebound faster.

Inflation could turn out higher if wages or profits increase by more than expected. 
Upside risks to inflation also stem from the heightened geopolitical tensions, which 
could push energy prices and freight costs higher in the near term and disrupt global 
trade. Moreover, extreme weather events, and the unfolding climate crisis more 
broadly, could drive up food prices by more than expected. By contrast, inflation may 
surprise on the downside if low confidence and concerns about geopolitical events 
prevent consumption and investment from recovering as fast as expected, if 
monetary policy dampens demand by more than expected, or if the economic 
environment in the rest of the world worsens unexpectedly. Greater friction in global 
trade would make the euro area inflation outlook more uncertain.

Market interest rates in the euro area have risen since the Governing Council’s 
meeting on 12 December 2024, partly mirroring higher rates in global financial 
markets. While financing conditions remain tight, the Governing Council’s interest 
rate cuts are gradually making it less expensive for firms and households to borrow.

Credit standards for business loans tightened again in the fourth quarter of 2024, 
having broadly stabilised over the previous four quarters, as reported in the January 
2025 bank lending survey. The renewed tightening mainly reflected banks becoming 
more concerned about the risks faced by their customers and less willing to take on 
risks themselves. Demand for loans by firms increased slightly in the fourth quarter 
but remained weak overall. Credit standards for mortgages were broadly unchanged, 
after three quarters of easing, while the demand for mortgages again increased 
strongly, mainly because of more attractive interest rates.

At its meeting on 30 January 2025, the Governing Council decided to lower the three 
key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In particular, the decision to lower the 
deposit facility rate – the rate through which the Governing Council steers the 
monetary policy stance – is based on its updated assessment of the inflation outlook, 
the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation stabilises 
sustainably at its 2% medium-term target. It will follow a data-dependent and 
meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy 
stance. In particular, the Governing Council’s interest rate decisions will be based on 
its assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial 
data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. The Governing Council is not pre-committing to a particular rate path.

In any case, the Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within 
its mandate to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at its medium-term target 
and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy transmission.

Over the review period from 12 December 2024 to 29 January 2025, global 
economic activity remained robust, albeit uneven across sectors and regions. Global 
trade growth moderated at the end of 2024, although the strong performance of US 
imports, possibly in the face of rising uncertainty about prospective trade policies, 
remained a major driver of global trade dynamics. Global headline inflation 
increased, largely due to higher energy prices, but core inflation continued to decline 
gradually.

Growth in global activity has remained robust, albeit uneven across sectors 
and regions, and this trend is expected to have continued at the start of 2025. 
In December 2024 the global composite output Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) 
(excluding the euro area) held steady at 53.2, unchanged from November (Chart 1). 
Solid growth in the services sector was offset by the continued weakness in 
manufacturing (the manufacturing output PMI stood at the neutral threshold of 50). 
This primarily reflects a downturn in the manufacturing cycle of advanced 
economies, where the output PMI dropped to 47.2. In emerging market economies, it 
remained above the neutral threshold despite a slight contraction compared with 
earlier months. Available industrial production data confirm these regional 
differences, with three-month-on-three-month changes indicating a marginal 
contraction in advanced economies and a moderate expansion in emerging market 
economies, leading to global manufacturing output growth of 1.1% in November. 
Overall, ECB nowcasting models point to steady quarter-on-quarter growth of around 
1.0% in the fourth quarter of 2024 and 1.1% in the first quarter of 2025.

Global trade growth moderated at the end of 2024, although strong US import 
growth continued to provide some tailwinds. Overall, ECB nowcasting models 
point to average global trade growth of 0.7% in the fourth quarter of 2024 and the

first quarter of 2025. This represents a moderation from the high average growth 
rates of 1.5% recorded in the second and third quarters of 2024, when fears over 
port strikes and concerns about supply chain disruptions ahead of the Christmas 
season, particularly in the United States, led to a surge in imports. While those fears 
subsequently receded to some extent, US imports remained strong at the end of the 
year, possibly amid uncertainty about trade policies under the new US 
Administration. Incoming port data for Los Angeles and Long Beach point to a 
considerable increase in the number of cargo vessels inbound from China in the 
second half of 2024 compared with the same period in the previous year. Taken 
together, the granular data suggest that US imports remained a major driver of 
global trade growth in the fourth quarter of 2024. Looking ahead, while efforts to 
anticipate potential trade restrictions may continue to support trade at the start of the 
first quarter of 2025, headwinds – including new tariffs and an unwinding of the 
observed frontloading of imports – may later materialise. Manufacturing new export 
orders declined in December 2024, pointing to ongoing weakness in the 
manufacturing cycle and tentative signs of a slowdown in global trade growth.

Headline inflation across the member countries of the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has increased, but core 
inflation continues to decline. In November 2024 the annual rate of consumer 
price index (CPI) inflation across OECD members (excluding Türkiye) rose to 2.7%, 
up from 2.6% in the previous month (Chart 2). This uptick in headline inflation was 
largely due to higher energy prices, with the contribution of food prices remaining 
broadly stable. However, core inflation, which excludes energy and food prices, 
eased slightly to 3.1%, continuing to return slowly to historical averages. Looking 
ahead, growing imports and shipping demand have started to affect shipping rates, 
which began to increase in the last quarter of 2024 but are still below their peak level 
reached in July that year. Overall, renewed upside risks to inflation remain contained 
in the near term.

Over the review period from 12 December 2024 to 29 January 2025, Brent 
crude oil prices climbed by 4.7%, while European gas prices increased by 
14.6%. The oil price increase was mainly fuelled by supply factors as a result of 
recent US sanctions targeting Russian oil flows and early signs of friction in relation 
to Iranian exports. The rise in European gas prices was attributable to a combination 
of supply and demand factors. On the supply side, the end of the transit agreement 
between Russia and Ukraine pushed up prices, even though it was largely expected. 
Supply pressures were also compounded by outages at a Norwegian liquefied 
natural gas plant. On the demand side, colder than usual temperatures in late 
December drove an increase in consumption. As a result, European gas storage at 
the end of 2024 had fallen below the year-end levels recorded in 2022 and 2023 and 
before the energy crisis. Metal prices remained stable throughout the review period, 
as precautionary metal-intensive imports from China offset longer-term uncertainty 
surrounding US tariff policies. Food prices increased by 5.9%, owing to higher prices 
for corn and cocoa.

Activity in the United States remains robust, although the inflation outlook has 
become more uncertain. Real GDP decelerated in the last quarter of 2024 but 
remained robust, at 0.6% quarter on quarter, down from 0.8% in the previous 
quarter.1 Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) continued to drive domestic 
demand, which increased further for both goods and services, owing mainly to higher 
real disposable incomes. By contrast, private investment put a drag on activity, as 
non-residential investment fell quarter on quarter as a result of lower contributions 
from transportation and information equipment, although these were largely offset by 
an increase in residential investment. The US labour market continues to cool but

remains resilient. US non-farm payroll employment rose by 256,000 jobs in 
December, on the back of a volatile last quarter of 2024 impacted by hurricanes and 
strikes. Overall, 2.2 million jobs were added in 2024, down from the expansion of 3 
million recorded in 2023. The unemployment rate edged down to 4.1% in December 
from 4.2% in November, while the participation rate remained unchanged at 62.5%, 
with little fluctuation over the year. Wage growth fell slightly to 3.9% year on year, 
continuing to approach the range of 3% to 3.5% that the Federal Reserve System 
considers to be consistent with its inflation target. US headline PCE inflation for 
November climbed to 2.4% due to higher energy prices, while core PCE inflation 
remained at 2.8%, with core services declining to 2.5%. The December CPI points to 
a slight increase in headline PCE inflation and a further decrease in core PCE 
inflation in the near term. Overall, key sources of inflation are cooling in the United 
States, as wage growth is expected to remain on a downward path and rents have 
continued to decline overall. At the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 
meeting on 29 January 2025, FOMC members were of the view that downside risks 
to the labour market had lessened amid increased uncertainty about the inflation 
outlook, particularly with regard to the impact of the proposed changes to trade and 
immigration policy.

Chinese activity rebounded at the end of 2024, but domestic demand remains 
weak. Quarterly GDP growth increased to 1.6% in the fourth quarter of 2024, up 
from 1.3% in the previous quarter. Monthly indicators for December highlighted that 
the recovery in GDP and industrial production was mainly driven by a government 
programme to trade in consumer goods in return for discounts on new products of 
the same type, and a surge in exports. In spite of the latest improvement, retail sales 
remain subdued as persistently negative consumer confidence continues to weigh 
on a broader spending recovery. Recent policy announcements signal increased 
fiscal and monetary support this year. Meanwhile, the property market is showing 
some localised signs of stabilisation, although the main indicators are still weak. 
Exports have continued to grow, mainly to the United States, although Chinese 
exporters are increasingly concerned about rising trade uncertainty. In December 
consumer price inflation in China decelerated further to 0.1%, down from 0.2% in 
November, while producer price inflation remained in negative territory. On average, 
producer prices contracted by 2.2% in 2024, resulting in significant downward 
momentum in Chinese export prices.

Activity in the United Kingdom remains weak amid persistent inflation. The UK 
economy remained sluggish in the fourth quarter of 2024. After an unexpected 
decline in October, UK real GDP growth increased marginally in November, bringing 
it to zero in the three months to November. This follows already flat growth in the 
third quarter. Headline CPI inflation eased slightly to 2.5% in December, down from 
2.6% in November, partly reflecting lower services inflation. Inflation is expected to 
remain above target throughout 2025, boosted by increased public spending and 
higher taxes on employment, as well as the continued unwinding of energy-related 
base effects. In line with the forecast rise in inflation, firms’ expectations for price 
growth over the coming year went up in November and December. This trend aligns 
with an uptick in households’ inflation expectations, which could be contributing to

persistent domestic inflationary pressures. At its December meeting, the Bank of 
England kept its policy rate at 4.75%.

Euro area output stagnated in the fourth quarter of 2024. Although the expenditure 
breakdown is not yet available, short-term indicators point to positive contributions 
from private and public consumption, which were largely offset by falling investment, 
alongside a broadly neutral net trade contribution. On the sectoral side, it is likely 
that the industrial sector continued to contract at the end of 2024 while services 
showed moderate growth. Survey data signal a continued moderate services-led 
expansion in the first quarter of 2025. At the same time, these indicators suggest 
ongoing weakness in the industrial sector amid subdued demand for goods, the 
impact of the past monetary policy tightening and significant trade policy uncertainty. 
This weakness is currently reflected in contracting labour demand in the sector. Euro 
area activity is expected to strengthen over the medium term. Growth should be 
supported by a pick-up in consumption, owing to still resilient labour markets and 
declining inflation. Strengthening foreign demand and the fading dampening effects 
of past monetary policy tightening should also underpin growth going forward. 
However, the economic outlook is surrounded by high uncertainty.

Euro area output stagnated in the fourth quarter of 2024, according to 
Eurostat’s preliminary flash estimate (Chart 3). Real GDP displayed no growth, 
quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter, following positive growth in the previous 
three quarters of the year.2 In 2024 as a whole, GDP is estimated to have risen by 
0.7%.3 Although the expenditure breakdown is not yet available, short-term 
indicators and available country data point to positive contributions from private and 
public consumption, which were offset by falling investment, while the contribution 
from net exports was broadly neutral. At the same time, the industrial sector likely 
remained weak, while the services sector was more resilient. Growth dynamics in the 
fourth quarter continued to be uneven among the largest euro area economies: GDP 
increased by 0.8%, quarter on quarter, in Spain, while declining by 0.2% in Germany 
and by 0.1% in France, and remaining flat in Italy. At the same time, output 
contracted by 1.3% in Ireland. The fourth quarter outcome for the euro area 
generates a carry-over effect of 0.3% for annual growth in 2025.4

4 This implies that GDP would grow by 0.3% in 2025 if all quarterly growth rates this year were zero (i.e. 
if quarterly GDP remains at the same level as in the fourth quarter of 2024).

Survey data signal a continued moderate services-led expansion in the first 
quarter of 2025. Although economic data with a bearing on the first quarter are 
scarce, the latest Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) offers some preliminary 
indications of developments at the start of the year. The composite output PMI stood 
at 50.2 in January, up from an average 49.3 in the fourth quarter of 2024. Across 
sectors, the PMI indicator for manufacturing output remained in contractionary 
territory in January, although it improved vis-à-vis the fourth quarter of 2024 (Chart 4, 
panel a). The new orders index, which should be more forward looking, has shown a 
similar pattern. Overall, these indicators suggest continued weakness in the 
industrial sector going forward amid subdued demand for goods and the impact of 
past monetary policy tightening. PMI data for the services sector, which has so far 
led the recovery in activity, continue to point to positive growth in both activity and 
new business (Chart 4, panel b). Movements in the PMI suggest that the recent 
sectoral differences are likely to persist in the short term. The main findings from the 
ECB’s recent contacts with non-financial companies point to subdued business 
momentum in the near term, with flat or declining manufacturing output alongside 
more resilient growth in services activity (see Box 5). Widespread economic policy 
uncertainty is also expected to weigh on the growth outlook for early 2025. Although 
this short-term narrative is echoed by the most recent ECB Survey of Professional 
Forecasters (conducted in January), respondents still see a gradual recovery in 
economic activity in the coming quarters.

The unemployment rate remains low despite signs of a gradual slowdown in 
the labour market. The unemployment rate stood at a record low of 6.3% in 
November, unchanged from October (Chart 5). A shift in the composition of the 
labour force towards older and more highly educated workers has been one of the 
factors behind this decline over the past two years (see Box 3). Nevertheless, the 
labour market continues to show signs of gradual cooling. Growth in the labour force, 
which has been a key driver of employment growth in the post-pandemic period, 
likely stabilised in the fourth quarter of 2024 at a lower rate than in recent quarters, 
but it is still elevated compared with average rates up to 2019. At the same time, 
labour demand is softening. The number of unfilled vacancies on the online job 
listings website Indeed remained significantly lower than in early 2024, while the 
number of new job postings declined throughout December.

Short-term indicators suggest that the labour market will continue to cool in 
the first quarter of 2025. The monthly composite PMI employment indicator 
increased from 49.2 in December to 49.8 in January, remaining around the neutral 
threshold of 50 points (Chart 5). The composite outturn masked different 
developments across sectors. Perceptions of employment growth became more 
negative in the manufacturing sector, while they rebounded into expansionary 
territory in the services sector. The PMI for employment in the services sector, 
however, remains well below its 2024 average. This evidence of a muted outlook for 
employment provided by the PMIs is consistent with the findings from the ECB’s 
recent contacts with non-financial companies (see Box 5). Overall, weaker 
employment dynamics should support a gradual recovery in labour productivity going 
forward.

Real private consumption increased by 0.7% in the third quarter of 2024, 
reflecting robust income growth and a decline in the elevated household 
saving rate. Following an average increase of 0.1% in the previous four quarters, 
household spending was boosted by strong demand for services in the third quarter 
of 2024, partly related to temporary factors (e.g. the Paris 2024 Olympic and 
Paralympic Games) (Chart 6, panel a). The moderation in food and energy inflation 
contributed to a rebound in the consumption of goods as well. The household saving 
rate declined but remained elevated at 15.2% in the third quarter – reflecting the 
positive effect on savings of the ongoing rise in real income, the still tight financing 
conditions, subdued confidence and high uncertainty (Chart 6, panel b). Household 
income growth continued to be driven by strong labour compensation.

Household spending growth likely moderated at the turn of the year, also 
reflecting the unwinding of the temporary factors seen in the third quarter. The 
volume of retail sales displayed weak dynamics early in the fourth quarter of 2024, 
suggesting a likely moderation in private consumption growth at the end of the year. 
Surveys also point to ongoing, albeit more moderate, household spending growth at 
the turn of the year. The European Commission’s consumer confidence indicator 
edged up in January 2025 (Chart 7) but remained subdued owing to weak 
expectations about the general economy and households’ financial situations over 
the next 12 months amid still elevated uncertainty. Business expectations for 
contact-intensive services dropped below their historical average in December 2024, 
suggesting a moderation in services demand in the first quarter of 2025. By contrast, 
retail trade expectations for the next three months improved further in December and 
the ECB’s latest Consumer Expectations Survey points to planned spending on 
holidays for the next 12 months still being robust. While consumer expectations for 
major purchases in the next 12 months moderated in December, they remained in 
line with their pre-pandemic average. Overall, the improvements in households’ 
purchasing power and real income perceptions should be the main drivers of the 
continuing private consumption growth (see Box 2).

Business investment remained muted around the turn of the year. Business 
investment (proxied by non-construction investment excluding Irish intangibles) 
contracted by 1.2%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2024, amid high 
volatility. At the same time, investment in machinery declined for the third quarter in 
a row and transport investment fell back, following a modest rebound in the first half 
of the year. Intangible investment continued to expand at a moderate pace. In the 
capital goods sector, output and new orders fell further in the fourth quarter, while 
industrial confidence among capital goods producers declined sharply to a low not 
seen since 2020 (Chart 8, panel a). Wider survey data – released mainly at the end 
of 2024 – do not suggest an imminent pick-up in business investment at the start of 
2025, although more forward-looking surveys anticipate improvements ahead. 
Earnings calls for the fourth quarter of 2024 suggest an ongoing deterioration in both 
investment sentiment and profit sentiment since the start of 2024. PMI production 
expectations for the coming 12 months and capacity utilisation indicators for the 
wider economy released by the European Commission’s Directorate General for 
Economic and Financial Affairs (ECFIN) remained well below typical levels 
consistent with investment growth in December. The ECB’s recent contacts with 
non-financial companies also reported downbeat expectations at the start of the 
year, with a strong focus on rationalisation and reducing the carbon footprint where 
investment remains strong (see Box 5). The Sentix investor confidence indicator fell 
to a 27-month low in January amid reports of rising bankruptcies and significant 
geopolitical, trade and policy uncertainty, although the six-month ahead indicator is 
less pessimistic and points to an improving outlook. Similarly, the latest ECFIN 
investment survey anticipates modest growth in annual business investment in 2025.

Housing investment fell once again in the third quarter of 2024, albeit at a 
slower pace compared with previous quarters. Housing investment declined by 
0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter, thus significantly moderating the 
downward trend which started in the second quarter of 2022 (Chart 8, panel b). In 
the fourth quarter, building construction output in October and November stood, on 
average, above its level in the third quarter. However, residential building permits 
remained at a historical low, suggesting that there were limited pressures from 
projects in the pipeline. Moreover, survey-based activity measures, such as the PMI 
for residential construction output and the European Commission’s indicator for 
building and specialised construction activity in the last three months, remained 
subdued up to December. Overall, this suggests that housing investment is likely to 
have broadly stagnated in the fourth quarter. Looking ahead, recent ECB surveys 
point to some favourable developments in the outlook for housing investment in the 
coming quarters. In the Consumer Expectations Survey, household expectations for 
the housing market, as reflected by the attractiveness of housing as a good 
investment, have broadly reached their average levels. The January bank lending 
survey indicates that demand for housing loans is expected to continue to improve in 
the first quarter of 2025 (see Section 5, “Financing conditions and credit 
developments”).

Euro area exports contracted in November 2024 amid persistent 
competitiveness challenges. Export orders for both manufacturing and services 
continued to fall in December. The weakness in export growth reflects the

continuation of a broader trend of declining euro area market shares amid persistent 
competitiveness issues for euro area manufacturers (including the medium-high tech 
and high tech sectors) and increasing competition from China (see Box 5). 
Meanwhile, imports rose by 1.1% in November in three-month-on-three-month 
terms, in line with the continued modest growth in consumption in the fourth quarter.

Overall, euro area activity is expected to strengthen over the medium term. 
Growth should be supported by a pick-up in consumption, owing to still resilient 
labour markets and declining inflation. Strengthening foreign demand and the fading 
dampening effects of past monetary policy tightening are factors that should also 
underpin growth going forward. However, the economic outlook is surrounded by 
high uncertainty, with geopolitics and trade tensions representing downside risks.

Euro area headline inflation rose to 2.4% in December 2024, up from 2.2% in 
November.5 This rise was expected and mainly due to base effects in energy price 
developments. Inflation is expected to fluctuate around its current level in the near 
term. Overall, indicators of underlying inflation are developing in line with a sustained 
return to the ECB’s 2% medium-term target for headline inflation. The indicator of 
domestic inflation remains high, reflecting strong wage growth and the fact that 
prices in certain sectors are still adjusting to the past inflation surge with a 
substantial delay. However, wage growth is moderating as expected, and profits are 
partially buffering their impact on inflation. Measures of longer-term inflation 
expectations were broadly unchanged at around 2%, while measures of shorter-term 
inflation expectations increased.

Euro area headline inflation, as measured in terms of the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP), increased to 2.4% in December from 2.2% in 
November (Chart 9). The increase was mainly driven by higher energy inflation and 
a small rise in services inflation. The inflation outcome for the fourth quarter of 2024 
was slightly below the December 2024 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area. This is despite oil and gas commodity prices being higher than 
foreseen in the December 2024 projections.

Energy inflation increased from -2.0% in November to 0.1% in December 2024. 
This increase was due to higher annual growth rates for electricity and transport fuel 
prices, while the growth rate for gas prices declined slightly. The higher rate of

change for energy inflation also reflects an upward base effect from the significant 
decrease in energy prices in December 2023.

Food inflation decreased slightly to 2.6% in December 2024, down from 2.7% 
the month before. Unprocessed food inflation declined to 1.6% in December from 
2.3% in November. This was mainly due to lower prices for fruit and vegetables. 
However, this decline was partly offset by an increase in processed food inflation 
(2.9% in December, up from 2.8% in November), driven by a strong surge in tobacco 
prices. The inflation rate for processed food excluding tobacco remained below 2%.

HICP inflation excluding energy and food (HICPX) remained unchanged in 
December, standing at 2.7% for the fourth consecutive month. Non-energy 
industrial goods (NEIG) inflation continued to hover around its long-term average, 
edging down to 0.5% in December from 0.6% in November. This decrease was 
offset by slightly higher services inflation (4.0% in December after 3.9% in 
November). In contrast to NEIG inflation, services inflation remained well above its 
long-term average of 1.9%, reflecting the impact of still elevated wage pressures on 
some of its items and the effects of lagged repricing on others. The slight drop in 
NEIG inflation in December was driven by a decline in the rates of semi-durable and 
durable goods inflation, while the inflation rate for non-durable goods remained 
unchanged. The rise in services inflation was mainly driven by higher annual rates 
for recreation and transport services.

Most underlying inflation indicators have been developing in line with a 
sustained return of headline inflation to the 2% medium-term target (Chart 10). 
Their values remained broadly stable in December 2024, ranging from 2.0% to 
2.8%.6 Most exclusion-based measures were unchanged in December, including the 
10% and 30% trimmed means, HICPX inflation excluding travel-related items, 
clothing and footwear (HICPXX) and HICP inflation excluding unprocessed food and 
energy. At the same time, the weighted median marginally increased to 2.5% in 
December from 2.4% in November. The indicator of domestic inflation, which mostly 
covers services items, was unchanged at 4.2% in December. Regarding model-
based measures, the Supercore indicator (which comprises HICP items sensitive to 
the business cycle) was also unchanged, standing at 2.8%, while the Persistent and 
Common Component of Inflation (PCCI) increased slightly to 2.1% in December, up 
from 2.0% in November.

6 For more information, see Lane, P.R., “Underlying inflation: an update”, speech at the Inflation: Drivers 
and Dynamics Conference 2024 organised by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the ECB, 24 
October 2024.

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Economic, financial and monetary developments 
Prices and costs

Chart 10 
Indicators of underlying inflation

Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations. 
Notes: The grey dashed line represents the ECB’s inflation target of 2% over the medium term. The latest observations are for 
December 2024.

Most indicators of pipeline pressures for goods inflation remained subdued in 
November (Chart 11). At the early stages of the pricing chain, producer price 
inflation for domestic sales of intermediate goods was still negative, but less so than 
in the previous month (-0.3% in November 2024 after -0.5% in October). In the later 
stages of the pricing chain, the annual growth rates of producer prices for non-food 
consumer goods decreased slightly to 1.1% in November from 1.3% in October. The 
annual growth rate of producer prices for manufactured food increased further to 
1.5% from 1.3% over the same period, confirming previous indications that the 
gradual easing of pipeline pressures has been fading out in this segment. The 
annual growth rate of import prices for non-food consumer goods moved upwards 
but remained moderate overall. Meanwhile, import price inflation for manufactured 
food increased further to 6.8% in November from 4.9% in October, possibly reflecting 
the surge in international food commodity prices since early 2024. The stronger 
import price dynamics also reflected the fact that the year-on-year rate of the 
nominal effective exchange rate of the euro had declined in November 2024. 
However, in October 2024 the rate was broadly unchanged compared with October 
2023.

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Economic, financial and monetary developments 
Prices and costs

Chart 11 
Indicators of pipeline pressures

Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations. 
Note: The latest observations are for November 2024.

Domestic cost pressures, as measured by growth in the GDP deflator, fell 
further to 2.7% in the third quarter of 2024, down from 2.9% in the previous 
quarter (Chart 12). This represents a significant decrease from the peak of 6.4% in 
the first quarter of 2023, although the rate has remained above its long-term average 
of 1.6% before the COVID-19 pandemic. The easing of GDP deflator dynamics 
mainly reflected a further moderation in unit labour costs growth (4.4% in the third 
quarter of 2024, down from 5.2% in the second quarter). This, in turn, was driven by 
lower wage growth, when measured in terms of both compensation per employee 
and compensation per hour. This moderation in actual wage growth concealed 
higher negotiated wage growth, which temporarily rose to 5.4% in the third quarter of 
2024 (up from 3.5% in the second quarter). While the contribution of unit profits to 
the GDP deflator was less negative in the third quarter, their role in buffering labour 
costs is still elevated. Looking forward, the ECB’s wage tracker, which includes data 
on wage agreements negotiated up to the end of December 2024, points to an 
easing of wage growth pressures. This observation is also confirmed by the latest 
survey indicators on wage growth, such as the ECB’s Corporate Telephone Survey, 
which expects wage growth to decrease from 4.3% in 2024 to 3.6% in 2025.7 The 
easing of wage growth pressures would be in line with reduced inflation 
compensation pressures and the cooling of labour demand.

7 For more information on the results of the January 2025 Corporate Telephone Survey, see the box 
entitled “Main findings from the ECB’s recent contacts with non-financial companies”, Economic 
Bulletin, Issue 1, ECB, 2025.

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Economic, financial and monetary developments 
Prices and costs

(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)

Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Compensation per employee contributes positively to changes in unit labour costs. Labour productivity contributes negatively. 
The latest observations are for the third quarter of 2024.

Survey-based indicators of longer-term inflation expectations and market-
based measures of longer-term inflation compensation remained stable, with 
most standing at around 2% (Chart 13). In both the ECB Survey of Monetary 
Analysts (SMA) for January 2025 and the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters 
(SPF) for the first quarter of 2025, median and average longer-term inflation 
expectations were unchanged at 2%. Longer-term market-based measures of 
inflation compensation (based on HICP excluding tobacco) increased slightly over 
the review period, with the five‑year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years 
ahead standing at around 2.1%. However, after adjusting for model-based estimates 
of inflation risk premia, market participants expect longer-term inflation to be around 
2%.

Market-based measures of near-term euro area inflation compensation, as 
measured by inflation fixings, have largely reversed the declines observed in 
autumn 2024 (Chart 13). These measures – reflecting market participants’ 
expectations for HICP inflation excluding tobacco – suggest that investors expect 
inflation to remain just above 2.0% for the rest of 2025 before settling near 2.0% 
around the turn of the year and into early 2026. In the medium term, the one-year 
forward inflation-linked swap rate starting one year ahead remained broadly 
unchanged at around 1.8% over the review period. On the consumer side, the 
December 2024 ECB Consumer Expectations Survey (CES) reported that the 
median rate of perceived inflation over the previous 12 months increased slightly 
from 3.4% in November to 3.5% in December. Median expectations for headline 
inflation over the next year also increased, to 2.8% in December from 2.6% in 
November. Meanwhile, median expectations for headline inflation three years ahead 
remained unchanged at 2.4%. The increase in consumer inflation expectations since 
September 2024 is linked to stronger perceptions of past inflation on average and 
higher inflation uncertainty for some respondents.

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Economic, financial and monetary developments 
Prices and costs

Chart 13 
Headline inflation, inflation projections and expectations

a) Headline inflation, market-based measures of inflation compensation, inflation projections 
and survey-based indicators of inflation expectations

b) Headline inflation and ECB Consumer Expectations Survey

Sources: Eurostat, LSEG, Consensus Economics, ECB (SMA, SPF, CES), Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro 
area, December 2024 and ECB calculations. 
Notes: In panel a), the market-based measures of inflation compensation series are based on the one-year spot inflation rate, the one-
year forward rate one year ahead, the one-year forward rate two years ahead and the one-year forward rate three years ahead. The 
observations for market-based measures of inflation compensation are for 29 January 2025. Inflation fixings are swap contracts linked 
to specific monthly releases in euro area year-on-year HICP inflation excluding tobacco. The SPF for the first quarter of 2025 was 
conducted between 7 and 9 January 2025. The cut-off date for the Consensus Economics long-term forecasts was 13 January 2025. 
The cut-off date for data included in the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections was 20 November 2024. In panel b), for the 
CES, the dashed lines represent the mean and the solid lines represent the median. The latest observations are for December 2024.

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Economic, financial and monetary developments 
Prices and costs

Over the review period from 12 December 2024 to 29 January 2025 the risk-free 
euro short-term rate (€STR) forward curve experienced an overall upward shift with 
some intermittent fluctuations. At the start of the period, the forward curve shifted 
downward. However, this trend reversed around the turn of the year and into early 
January, driven by rising energy prices and new data releases for the US economy, 
which prompted upward revisions in inflation expectations and contributed to the 
rebound in the forward curve. As a result, at the end of the review period, markets 
were pricing in 90 basis points of cumulative interest rate cuts in the euro area by the 
end of 2025. Long-term sovereign bond yields also rose, by slightly more than risk-
free rates. In equity markets, euro area stock prices increased as improved risk 
sentiment offset the impact of rising risk-free rates, while US stocks declined overall, 
primarily as a result of a decrease in equity prices in the IT sector. Meanwhile, in 
euro area corporate bond markets, spreads narrowed for both investment-grade and 
high-yield issuers. In the foreign exchange market, the euro depreciated moderately 
against the US dollar and remained broadly stable in trade-weighted terms.

Euro area near-term risk-free rates increased in the review period following the 
December Governing Council meeting. The benchmark €STR averaged 3.0% 
over the review period, following the Governing Council’s widely anticipated decision 
to lower the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points at its December meeting. 
Excess liquidity was broadly stable, increasing by approximately €22 billion to €2,923 
billion. This mainly reflected the fact that the repayments in December of funds 
borrowed in the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO 
III) and the decline in the portfolios of securities held for monetary policy purposes, 
with the Eurosystem no longer reinvesting the principal payments from maturing 
securities in its asset purchase programmes, were offset by a decrease in liquidity-
absorbing net autonomous factors. After an initial decline, short-term rate 
expectations priced into the forward curve started to rise at around the turn of the 
year and into early January, as market participants revised their inflation outlook 
following an increase in energy prices. Euro area financial markets also reacted to 
the better than expected macroeconomic data releases for the US economy and to 
expectations of a slower future pace of interest rate cuts by the US Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC). In the euro area, the overnight index swap (OIS) forward 
curve, which is based on the €STR, increased by 7 basis points for one-year 
maturities and 24 basis points for two-year maturities, reflecting expectations of a 
slower pace of monetary policy easing in the euro area. By the end of the review 
period, markets were pricing in cumulative interest rate cuts of 90 basis points by the 
end of 2025, 33 basis points less than at the start of the period. Longer-term euro 
area risk-free rates also rose during the review period. The ten-year nominal OIS 
rate reached 2.4%, an overall increase of 32 basis points.

Long-term euro area sovereign bond yield spreads relative to risk-free rates 
increased slightly (Chart 14). The ten-year GDP-weighted euro area sovereign 
bond yield closed the review period at 3.0%, an increase of 35 basis points from its 
initial level. This resulted in a 4 basis point widening of the spread relative to the OIS 
rate. Sovereign bond spreads widened across jurisdictions, with a relatively narrow

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Economic, financial and monetary developments 
Financial market developments

dispersion across most countries. Internationally, the ten-year US Treasury yield 
rose by 20 basis points to 4.5%, while the ten-year UK sovereign bond yield climbed 
by 25 basis points, reaching 4.6%.

Chart 14 
Ten-year sovereign bond yields and the ten-year OIS rate based on the €STR

Sources: LSEG and ECB calculations. 
Notes: The vertical grey line denotes the start of the review period on 12 December 2024. The latest observations are for 29 January 
2025.

Euro area equity prices ended the review period at somewhat higher levels. 
Despite the increase in interest rates, broad stock market indices climbed by 4.6% 
following an initial decline, supported by improved risk sentiment amid very few 
notable surprises in macroeconomic data. Corresponding stock market indices in the 
Unites States declined marginally, by 0.2%, reflecting the shift in market participants’ 
monetary policy outlook. In the euro area, equity prices of non-financial corporations 
rose by 3.6%, while those of banks and other financial corporations gained 10.9% 
and 8.1% respectively. In the United States, equity prices of banks and other 
financial corporations increased by 6.6% and 3.1%, while those of non-financial 
corporations declined by 0.5%. The decrease in non-financial corporation equity 
prices was primarily driven by a decline in the IT sector.

Corporate bond spreads narrowed in both the investment-grade and high-yield 
segments. The positive market sentiment was also reflected in corporate bond 
spreads, which, amid some volatility, narrowed in both the investment-grade 
segment and the high-yield segment by 5 basis points overall. The narrowing in the 
investment-grade segment was driven by a decrease of 7 basis points in spreads on 
bonds issued by financial corporations, while spreads on non-financial corporation 
bonds declined by 4 basis points.

by 0.2%) during the review period, given offsetting developments in the exchange 
rates against key currencies. The depreciation of the euro against the US dollar (by 
0.9%) was largely driven by factors specific to the United States, such as the market 
reaction to the December FOMC meeting, robust US macroeconomic data releases 
and the anticipation of the economic policies of the incoming US Administration. The 
euro weakened by 1.2% against the Chinese renminbi, while the latter also 
weakened against the US dollar, albeit to a lesser extent. Conversely, the euro 
appreciated by 1.6% against the pound sterling amid growing expectations of future 
rate cuts by the Bank of England, weaker incoming economic data in the United 
Kingdom and uncertainty over the government budget outlook. Following a sustained 
appreciation for most of 2024, the Swiss franc depreciated by 1.2% against the euro 
after a larger than expected interest rate cut by the Swiss National Bank in 
December. The euro also appreciated by 1.2% against the Japanese yen. Over the 
review period the euro was little changed against most other major advanced and 
emerging market currencies.

While financing conditions remain tight, ECB policy rate cuts are gradually making it 
less expensive for firms and households to borrow. In November 2024 bank funding 
costs and bank lending rates continued their gradual decline from peak levels. The 
average interest rates on new loans to firms and on new mortgages fell in November 
to 4.5% and 3.5% respectively. Growth in loans to firms and households increased in 
December but remained weak, reflecting still subdued demand and tight credit 
standards. Over the period from 12 December 2024 to 29 January 2025, the cost to 
firms of market-based debt financing increased while the cost of equity financing fell, 
reflecting the higher long-term risk-free interest rate and the lower equity risk 
premium. According to the January 2025 euro area bank lending survey, credit 
standards for loans to firms tightened in the fourth quarter of 2024, driven by higher 
perceived risks and lower risk tolerance. Credit standards remained unchanged for 
housing loans, after three quarters of easing. Housing loan demand rebounded 
strongly, while loan demand by firms remained weak. In the latest Survey on Access 
to Finance of Enterprises (SAFE) for the fourth quarter of 2024, firms reported a fall 
in bank interest rates and a further slight tightening of other loan conditions. Firms 
also indicated that there had been no change in the need for bank loans and a small 
reduction in bank loan availability. The annual growth rate of broad money (M3) 
declined slightly to 3.5% in December.

Euro area bank funding costs continued to gradually retreat from their peak 
levels, reflecting the ECB’s recent policy rate cuts and the expected interest 
rate path. The composite cost of debt financing for euro area banks edged down in 
November 2024, standing at 1.9% (Chart 16, panel a). While the lower bank funding 
costs resulted primarily from a fall in bank bond yields (Chart 16, panel b), data 
available until 29 January show that a repricing of risk-free rates has put upward 
pressure on bank bond yields recently. Average deposit rates fell further, with the 
composite deposit rate standing at 1.2% in November, driven by diminishing interest 
rates on time deposits for firms and households. In contrast, rates on overnight 
deposits and deposits redeemable at notice remained broadly unchanged.

Bank balance sheets have been robust overall, despite a weak economic 
environment. In the third quarter of 2024, bank capitalisation remained broadly 
stable with capital ratios well above 15% and voluntary capital buffers exceeding 
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) requirements. Bank profitability remained at a high 
level in the third quarter of 2024, although downward pressure on earnings on 
floating rate assets will become a headwind for interest income as credit losses start 
to rise. Non-performing loans stayed broadly unchanged, being close to the historical 
lows seen in the first quarter of 2023. However, the proportion of underperforming 
(i.e. Stage 2) loans increased somewhat in 2024, especially as regards small firms 
and commercial real estate, pointing to worsening asset quality and higher 
provisioning costs for banks looking ahead.

Bank lending rates for firms and for households declined further. Lending rates 
for firms and households have fallen since the summer of 2024, reflecting lower 
policy rates (Chart 17). In November 2024, lending rates for new loans to non-
financial corporations (NFCs) fell by 15 basis points to stand at 4.52%, around 80 
basis points below their October 2023 peak (Chart 17, panel a), this fall being 
widespread across the largest euro area countries. The spread between interest 
rates on small and large loans to firms widened in November to 0.48%. Lending 
rates on new loans to households for house purchase edged down by 8 basis points 
to stand at 3.47% in November, around 60 basis points below their November 2023 
peak (Chart 16, panel b), with variation across countries. The decline was broad-
based across fixation periods and more pronounced for variable rate mortgages, 
which nonetheless remained more expensive than those granted at fixed rates.

Over the period from 12 December 2024 to 29 January 2025, the cost to firms 
of market-based debt financing rose, while the cost of equity financing fell. 
Based on the monthly data, available until November 2024, the overall cost of 
financing for NFCs – i.e. the composite cost of bank borrowing, market-based debt 
and equity – declined in November compared with the previous month and stood at 
5.6%, sliding further below the multi-year high reached in October 2023 (Chart 18).8 
The fall in November 2024 was accounted for by lower costs for both market-based 
debt and bank borrowing, while the cost of equity financing remained virtually 
unchanged. Daily data covering the period from 12 December 2024 to 29 January 
2025 show that the cost of market-based debt financing increased, driven by an 
upward shift in the overnight index swap (OIS) curve. At the same time, the cost of

equity financing declined following a lower equity risk premium that offset the higher 
long-term risk-free rate – as approximated by the ten-year OIS rate.

Growth in loans to firms and households increased in December but remained 
weak, reflecting still subdued demand and tight credit standards. The annual 
growth rate of bank lending to firms rose to 1.5% in December 2024, up from 1.0% in 
November 2024, amid a strong monthly flow, but remaining well below its historical 
average of 4.8% (Chart 19, panel a). In contrast, the annual growth rate of corporate 
debt securities decreased to 3.2% in December from 3.6% in November. The annual 
growth rate of loans to households strengthened further to 1.1% in December, up 
from 0.9% in November, although remaining well below its historical average of 4.1% 
(Chart 19, panel b). This gradual recovery continued to be driven by housing loans. 
Consumer credit grew by 3.6% in December, while other lending to households, 
including loans to sole proprietors, is still contracting, albeit at a decelerating pace. 
The ECB’s Consumer Expectations Survey in November 2024 showed that the 
percentage of households who perceived credit access to have been tighter still 
outweighs that perceiving credit access to have been easier.

In the January 2025 euro area bank lending survey, banks reported a renewed 
tightening of credit standards for loans to firms in the fourth quarter of 2024 
and broadly unchanged credit standards for housing loans, after three 
quarters of easing (Chart 20). Credit standards for loans to firms saw their most 
pronounced (net) tightening since the third quarter of 2023 and this was 
accompanied by an increase in the share of rejected loan applications. The net 
tightening was driven by higher perceived risks related to the economic outlook and 
by lower risk tolerance on the part of banks. Banks reported broadly unchanged 
credit standards for loans to households for house purchase and a small reduction in 
the share of rejected applications. The stability of credit standards for housing loans 
is in contrast to the strong net easing that banks had expected in the previous 
quarter. In terms of drivers, while competition among banks exerted downward 
pressure on housing loan credit standards, banks’ risk tolerance and risk perceptions 
had a tightening effect. For consumer credit and other lending to households, banks 
reported a (net) increase in the share of rejected applications and a further (net) 
tightening of credit standards, primarily driven by risk perceptions and banks’ risk 
tolerance. For the first quarter of 2025, euro area banks expect a further tightening of 
credit standards for loans to firms, for consumer credit and for housing loans.

In the fourth quarter of 2024, banks reported a slight increase in loan demand 
by firms, although that demand remained weak overall, while housing loan 
demand continued to rebound strongly. The rise in loan demand by firms was 
driven by lower interest rates, while fixed investment exerted a muted impact. For 
housing loans, the strong increase in demand primarily reflected falling interest rates 
and, to a lesser extent, improving housing market prospects. While demand for 
consumer credit was also supported by declining interest rates, it was dampened by 
weak consumer confidence, as well as low spending on durables and the use of

alternative finance from other banks and non-banks. For the first quarter of 2025, 
banks expect broadly unchanged demand for loans to firms and a further increase in 
demand for loans to households.

The ad hoc survey questions suggested that access to funding slightly 
deteriorated and perceived risks to credit quality had a tightening impact on 
credit standards for firms and consumers. Banks reported that their access to 
funding worsened somewhat for retail funding, money markets and debt securities in 
the last quarter of 2024. Supervisory and regulatory measures contributed to an 
increase in banks’ required capital, as well as in their liquid and risk-weighted assets, 
which in turn contributed to a tightening of credit standards, especially for loans to 
firms. Perceived credit quality in bank loan portfolios also had a significant tightening 
effect on credit standards for both loans to firms and consumer credit in the second 
half of 2024, whereas the impact was neutral for housing loans. Over this same 
period, credit standards for firms continued to tighten across all the main economic 
sectors, especially in commercial real estate, wholesale and retail trade, construction 
and energy-intensive manufacturing. Loan demand decreased in net terms in 
commercial real estate, construction and energy-intensive manufacturing, and 
remained broadly unchanged in the other sectors. Banks reported that the decline in 
excess liquidity held with the Eurosystem had had a neutral impact on bank lending 
conditions in the second half of 2024, and a similar outcome is expected in the first 
half of 2025.

Firms saw unchanged bank loan needs, together with a small decline in bank 
loan availability, with few expecting significant improvements in that 
availability over the next three months (Chart 21). The small decrease in the 
availability of bank loans in the fourth quarter of 2024 coincided with the recent 
tightening of bank credit policies, especially as regards credit standards, as 
highlighted in the euro area bank lending survey for the same period. The financing 
gap for bank loans – an index capturing the difference between changes in needs 
and in availability – widened for a net 1% of firms, compared with a net 2% of firms 
experiencing a narrowing of that gap in the previous quarter. Looking ahead, firms 
expect to see small improvements in bank loan availability over the next three 
months, this expectation chiefly being held by large firms, while SMEs anticipate a 
slight decline in availability.

October (Chart 22). Annual growth of narrow money (M1) – which comprises the 
most liquid assets of M3 – increased further to 1.8% in December, compared with 
1.5% in November. The annual growth rate of overnight deposits – a component of 
M1 – rose to 1.8% in December, up from 1.5% in November. The contribution of net 
foreign flows, which have been the main source of money creation since late 2023, is 
showing tentative signs of weakening, while the contribution of lending to firms and 
households is gaining weight. In contrast, the ongoing contraction of the Eurosystem 
balance sheet and the issuance of long-term bank bonds (which are not included in 
M3) amid the phasing out of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) 
funding by the end of 2024 continued to contribute negatively to M3 growth.

While headline inflation has decelerated significantly across advanced 
economies in the past two years, services inflation has remained high. Since 
peaking in mid-2022, headline inflation in advanced economies (excluding the euro 
area) has declined significantly, supported mainly by falling or negative contributions 
from energy and core goods prices (Chart A). At the same time, services inflation 
has remained high, representing by far the largest component of headline inflation.1 
This box analyses the main drivers of services inflation in the United States and the 
United Kingdom, disentangling services inflation excluding rents from rent inflation, 
as they follow different dynamics. Specifically, the box highlights the role of labour 
market tightness and catch-up dynamics in non-rent services inflation.2

1 One factor behind the strong contribution of services inflation, compared with core goods, energy or 
food, is the larger weight of services in the consumer price index (CPI): 53.9% based on OECD 
weights, compared with 25.6% for core goods, 12.7% for food and 7.8% for energy. This may also 
reflect a slower pass-through of energy price shocks to services inflation than to energy and core 
goods inflation (see, for example, Kilian, L., “The Economic Effects of Energy Price Shocks”, Journal of 
Economic Literature, Vol. 46, Issue 4, December 2008, pp. 871-909).

In the case of non-rent services inflation, empirical analysis suggests that 
wage growth has been a key driver. The results of an econometric analysis 
indicate that wage inflation has generally been the main driver of core services 
inflation excluding rent (Chart B).3 Input prices also played an important role in the 
strong rise in services inflation in 2022 and 2023, when producer prices inflation was 
pushed up by supply bottlenecks and large energy shocks, reaching levels twice as 
high as before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.4 However, as input price 
pressures have receded on the back of a strong deceleration in producer price 
inflation, nominal wage pressures have become the main driver of services price 
inflation. The sources of inflationary pressures have thus shifted away from global 
and towards domestic factors, reflecting second-round effects as nominal wages 
start to catch up with inflation.5 This is consistent with persistently high nominal 
wage inflation in the United States and the United Kingdom, which stood at 3.9% and 
5.3%, respectively, in the second quarter of 2024, and the persistence of services 
inflation, despite downward pressure stemming from other factors.

5 While not captured directly in the model, firms’ markups might also have played a role in the inflation 
surge, as evidenced for the United States in Gerinovics, R. and Metelli, L., “The evolution of firm 
markups in the US and implications for headline and core inflation”, VoxEU, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research, December 2023, and for the United Kingdom in Bunn, P., Anayi, L.S., Bloom, N., Mizen, P., 
Thwaites, G. and Yotzov, I., “Firming up Price Inflation”, NBER Working Paper, No 30505, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, September 2022.

Labour market tightness and catch-up dynamics have been the main 
contributors to the post-pandemic acceleration of wage growth and its recent 
moderation. An examination of the factors underlying nominal wage inflation 
suggests that a large part of wage growth developments in the United States and the 
United Kingdom can be attributed to labour market tightness and lagged inflation, 
reflecting second-round effects as nominal wages catch up with previous inflation 
(Chart C).6 In the United States, both labour market tightness and high inflation rates 
have contributed to the acceleration in wages since 2021. After the peak in mid-
2022, wage growth started to decline again, equally supported by a softening of 
labour market tightness and lower inflation. By contrast, in the United Kingdom the 
timing of the contributions of these two factors to wage growth was different. Labour 
market tightness played a strong role in the initial wage acceleration after mid-2021, 
mainly owing to UK-specific conditions, such as a decline in the labour force driven 
by increased long-term sickness and Brexit-related labour shortages.7 Lagged 
inflation, probably linked to second-round effects, started to play a more prominent 
role in the second half of 2022. Since late 2022 and early 2023, labour market 
tightness has started to ease, while lagged inflation has remained the main driver of 
wage growth above pre-pandemic levels.8

8 For the United Kingdom, the varying contribution from labour market slack to wage inflation since 2023 
reflects volatility in the official unemployment rate, largely due to a strong decline in participation in the 
labour force survey. Meanwhile, vacancies have come down smoothly in the same period, consistent 
with easing pressures. Negative wage growth during the pandemic can be explained by the furlough 
scheme which was in place from March 2020 to September 2021 and led to lower earnings for some 
workers who were on furlough.

Forward-looking indicators point to a moderation of wage growth. The Indeed 
Wage Tracker is generally considered a leading indicator for wage growth as it is 
based on pay offers included in new job ads online. The latest data from the tracker 
point to a decline in wage growth for the United States and a stabilisation at relatively 
high levels for the United Kingdom (Chart D). In the third quarter of 2024, the Indeed 
Wage Tracker for the United States was in the range of 3 to 3.5% for the third 
consecutive quarter, showing signs of stabilising at its pre-pandemic level. In the 
United Kingdom, the tracker has stabilised at an annual growth rate of 6 to 7% for 
the last three quarters. Hence, while the actual nominal wage growth series in the 
United Kingdom is showing clear signs of gradual disinflation (Chart C), and forward-
looking business surveys point to a moderation, there remains some uncertainty 
around the extent of the moderation, as suggested by the unchanged value of the 
Indeed Wage Tracker. The latest readings of the ratio of vacancies to 
unemployment, an indicator of labour market tightness, also exhibited substantial 
signs of easing and a return to pre-pandemic averages for both countries. This is 
consistent with a likely, albeit delayed, cooling of UK wage inflation going forward.

In addition, rent inflation accounts for a non-negligible part of services 
inflation in the United States and the United Kingdom. Rent inflation (excluding 
owner-occupied housing) accounts for 12% and 16%, respectively, of US and UK 
services inflation.9 Rent inflation tends to exhibit strong persistence, since only new 
contracts and agreements renegotiated for contractual reasons affect the stock of 
rental agreements. Hence, large inflationary shocks – such as seen in recent years – 
pass through to overall rent inflation only with a lag. From 2021, rent inflation lifted 
off in the United Kingdom and even more so in the United States, where it appears to 
have peaked in mid-2023 (Chart E). Data from independent rental brokers on new 
rental agreements, which show a high correlation with one-year-ahead CPI rent 
inflation, suggest that, in the near term, rental inflation should decrease further in the 
United States and start easing in the United Kingdom.

A moderation in wage growth and rent inflation should bring down services 
inflation, although the pace of disinflation remains uncertain. Forward-looking 
indicators are pointing to a deceleration in wage growth and rent inflation amid still 
restrictive monetary policy in both jurisdictions. Should wage growth and rent 
inflation decelerate in the near term in line with these forward-looking indicators, UK 
and US services inflation can be expected to decrease. However, the pace of 
disinflation remains uncertain, and more persistent than expected services inflation 
could be fuelled by enduringly high wage growth, particularly if the labour market 
remains tight or if workers continue to make high wage demands in response to the 
erosion of real wages by past inflation. Moreover, structural shifts in wage and price-
setting behaviour might have contributed to the recent inflationary persistence and 
might continue to do so in the period ahead.10

Over the past few years private consumption has risen at a slower pace than 
real disposable income.1 Chart A illustrates the diverging paths of real income and 
private consumption during the last three years. According to the national accounts, 
real household income increased by 3.8% between the second quarter of 2022 and 
the second quarter of 2024. However, real private consumption did not follow the 
same trend, growing by only 1.2% over the same period. It is well documented that 
past personal experiences affect the economic decisions of households.2 Thus, one 
possible explanation for the slower consumption growth is that the recent inflation 
surge has scarred people’s beliefs, causing households to perceive their real income 
to be lower than it actually is.3 As households adjust their actual consumption on the 
basis of these beliefs, such perceptions can have an effect on consumer spending. 
In this box, we use data from the ECB’s Consumer Expectations Survey (CES) to 
assess this factor for the euro area.

The inflation surge seen in the past few years has had a negative impact on 
how consumers perceive their real income. In response to a qualitive question in 
the September 2024 CES, only 37% of respondents (21% in response to the same 
question in September 2023) reported that their real household income had 
increased or stayed the same (Chart B, panel a). This stands in stark contrast to the 
growth in real income of the same households based on their self-reported nominal 
labour income in 2023 and 2024 and official country-specific inflation rates.4 These 
implied real income realisations show that over 50% of all households experienced 
positive real income growth during the same period. Thus, households have a much 
more pessimistic perception of their real income than their actual real income would 
imply – although this perception has improved since 2023. This suggests that the 
recent inflation surge has had a negative impact on households’ perceptions.

4 Households report their labour income (including self-employment income) every quarter, which allows 
annual changes in household-level real income to be computed using official inflation rates. Using 
respondent-specific inflation perceptions instead of actual inflation rates does not change the results 
and current inflation perceptions do not explain the pessimism in the responses to the qualitive 
question. Hence, the pessimism reflects a perception of a negative real income shock that is persistent 
over time.

Pessimism about real income is more widespread among lower-income 
households. The net percentage of pessimists – or the difference between the 
share of people who underestimate changes in their real income minus the share of 
people who overestimate such changes – is much higher at the bottom of the income 
distribution than it is at the top (Chart B, panel b). This is likely a reflection of 
differences in the composition of their income (financial versus labour), their 
consumption basket or level of financial literacy. The prevalence of pessimistic 
perceptions is relatively evenly distributed across all countries in our sample, except 
for Belgium. The less pessimistic real income perceptions among Belgian

households seem to be related to the widespread (and well understood) indexation 
of wages and other incomes to inflation in that country, which has accelerated the 
realignment of nominal incomes to higher prices.5

Pessimistic perceptions about real income have a negative impact on actual 
consumption. Based on observations of households with increasing real income 
between 2023 and 2024, the sample can be classified as (i) households with 
increasing real incomes that correctly perceive their real incomes have increased; 
and (ii) households with increasing real incomes that perceive that their real incomes 
have decreased. The impact of pessimism is estimated by comparing the changes in 
consumption of these two groups. For households that believe their incomes have 
decreased although they have not, this pessimism might negatively affect their 
realised consumption compared with households that correctly believe their real 
incomes have increased. Chart C shows the difference in total changes in 
consumption for these two groups between 2023 and 2024. Pessimistic households 
show significantly more negative changes in consumption than those that correctly 
perceive increases in their incomes. This difference is visible in all consumption 
categories, but it is greater in services than in necessities and durable goods.

As the scarring effects of the recent inflation surge dissipate, consumption is 
expected to catch up with real income growth. The recent inflation surge has 
strongly affected households’ real income perceptions, with a negative impact on 
actual consumption. As pessimism following large economic shocks typically

disappears, albeit gradually, consumption should gain momentum as perceptions 
about real incomes improve.6

Demographic changes in the euro area labour market affect the unemployment 
rate. The euro area unemployment rate has decreased by 0.9 percentage points 
since the fourth quarter of 2021, falling to 6.3% in October 2024, its lowest level 
since the creation of the euro.1 This decline occurred despite the significant increase 
in the size of the labour force, which grew by 3.5% between the fourth quarter of 
2021 and the third quarter of 2024. This increase was largely attributable to non-EU 
labour2, older workers3 and workers with a tertiary education. These groups grew by 
24.7%, 9.9% and 7.9% respectively (Chart A) and increased not only in terms of their 
respective sizes but also as regards their participation rates. The degree to which 
demographic shifts in the labour force can affect unemployment rates varies 
depending on the different characteristics of the groups concerned, including the 
differing unemployment risks of their professions and their job tenures. For instance, 
workers with longer job tenures often have greater protection against layoffs under 
employment legislation. Furthermore, experienced workers and workers with higher 
educational attainment levels frequently find new jobs more quickly after becoming 
unemployed. Demographic characteristics, such as age, educational attainment and 
nationality can therefore affect the likelihood of being employed or unemployed. 
Against this backdrop, this box explores the role of labour supply factors in driving 
the unemployment rate and, more specifically, the potential contributions of 
demographic developments.4

4 The current dynamics of the unemployment rate have also benefited from labour hoarding in the euro 
area, which has helped to contain layoffs. For an analysis and estimates of labour hoarding, see the 
box entitled “Higher profit margins have helped firms hoard labour”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 
2024.

The decline in the unemployment rate has been supported by demographic 
shifts in the labour force. The rise in the proportion of older workers, non-EU 
labour and workers with a tertiary education in the labour force has intensified their 
contribution to the recent decline in the unemployment rate (Chart B, red bars). Over 
the last three years, the changes in the sizes of these groups have been substantial 
and accompanied by falling unemployment rates. These falls are attributable, first, to 
the constantly improving educational level of the workforce, reflecting better access 
to education in the euro area for the current cohorts relative to those of the past. The 
proportion of the workforce with a tertiary education has risen by 1.6 percentage 
points since the fourth quarter of 2021 (Chart B). Second, the proportion of older 
workers has increased strongly since 2021 (up by 1.3 percentage points), while the 
proportion of prime-age workers is continuing to decline (having fallen by 1.7 
percentage points over the same period). Both groups contributed to the recent 
decline in the unemployment rate. Third, the proportion of foreign workers in the 
working population has also increased significantly over the past two years, 
particularly that of non-EU labour (rising by 1.3 percentage points since the fourth 
quarter of 2021). However, given that their unemployment rate is higher than that for 
the rest of the workforce, foreign workers did not contribute to the recent decline in 
the unemployment rate. Over the same period, the proportion of national workers 
decreased (falling by 1.6 percentage points since the fourth quarter of 2021) owing 
to the demographic decline in the working age of EU home-country populations.

increasing by 9.9% for intra-EU labour and by 24.7% for non-EU labour. While the 
unemployment rates for foreign workers (7.4% for intra-EU labour and 12.6% for 
non-EU labour) are significantly higher than the unemployment rate for national 
workers (5.8%), the growing participation of foreign workers in the labour market in 
recent years has had no significant impact on the unemployment rate in the euro 
area, given that much of this increased participation has translated into higher 
employment. The unemployment rate for non-EU labour has, in fact, fallen more than 
the rate for national workers. However, a counterfactual unemployment rate, 
assuming, for non-EU labour, an unchanged unemployment rate and labour force 
participation at the level observed in the fourth quarter of 2021, would not have 
changed the overall unemployment rate in the third quarter of 2024 and the rate 
would even have been 0.1 percentage points higher than in 2022-23 (Chart C).

Shifts in educational attainment slightly decreased the unemployment rate. 
The increasing proportion of the workforce with a tertiary education contributed 
significantly to the gradual decline in the unemployment rate. If the proportions for 
educational attainment had remained at the levels seen in the fourth quarter of 2021, 
the unemployment rate in the third quarter of 2024 would have been 0.2 percentage 
points higher. While the unemployment rate for workers with a tertiary education did 
not fall more strongly than the overall rate, it was structurally lower. This can 
generally be explained by the more flexible skills of these workers, resulting in a 
reduction in their risks of unemployment and making it easier for them to find new 
employment after a job loss.5 This is not the case in all countries, however. In 
Germany and the Netherlands, for instance, workers with a vocational secondary

At the same time, the increasing proportion of older workers in the labour 
force has contributed significantly to the recent decrease in the unemployment 
rate. The population of the euro area is ageing and older workers are remaining in 
the labour market for longer. For instance, owing to their higher labour market 
attachment relative to previous cohorts and thanks to a continuing high demand for 
expertise and skills and a secular shift in tasks (e.g. towards less physically 
demanding tasks), more workers are continuing to work up to their statutory 
retirement age. Moreover, several countries have reformed their pension systems, 
leading to an increase in the effective retirement age.6 Consequently, older workers 
are becoming a larger group within the labour force and their labour market 
participation increased by 9.1% between the fourth quarter of 2021 and the third 
quarter of 2024.7 In addition, the unemployment rate for older workers is low, 
standing at 4.4% in the third quarter of 2024 (1.0 percentage points lower than in the 
last quarter of 2021), compared with 5.8% for prime-age workers (falling by 0.9 
percentage points over the same period). If the unemployment rate and labour force 
participation of older workers had remained constant at the levels seen at the end of 
2021, the aggregate euro area unemployment rate would have been 0.3 percentage 
points higher in the third quarter of 2024.

Extreme weather events like the devastating flash floods that hit Spain last 
October have substantial human, social and economic impacts. Climate change 
is making these types of event more commonplace and the trend is predicted to go 
on rising. Moreover, it is not only increasing frequency that is of concern but also 
greater potency, as evidenced in south-eastern Spain, which until now has not seen 
as frequent flooding as other regions in Europe (Figure A). In October 2024, some 
weather stations near Valencia recorded a year’s worth of rain in just eight hours.1 
By one early estimate, the event was made twice as likely, and 12% more powerful, 
than it would have been in the absence of human-made climate change.2

On top of the devastating effects for society and the sudden disruption of 
economic activity, the full impact of extreme weather events over the medium 
and long run can be significant, particularly in the context of a changing

climate. First, while the short-run costs are generally confined to the immediate 
damage and disruption caused by the events themselves, changes to investment, 
labour supply and productivity could potentially prolong the economic effects. 
Second, extreme weather events are often relatively local, prompting migration 
dynamics that can slow down a possible economic recovery. And third, the effects of 
extreme weather events depend on initial climate conditions. As climate change 
alters baseline temperatures and precipitation patterns, the economic consequences 
of such events over the business cycle may worsen in the future.

Floods can affect both supply and demand in the economy, making the overall 
impact on inflation uncertain.3 Disruptions to supply and infrastructure can 
increase costs for firms and encourage them to raise their prices. At the same time, 
job losses and lower household incomes, coupled with greater uncertainty, can 
depress demand. There are few studies of the impact of floods on inflation, but what 
is available points to an immediate, but short-lived increase in food prices and a 
more prolonged decrease in core inflation, as short-term supply disruptions give way 
to weaker demand.4 The overall impact on prices likely depends on how quickly and 
fully supply and infrastructure are rebuilt.

Turning to the effects on real economic activity in more detail, the impact of 
floods can vary greatly across sectors and regions.5 Whereas flooding is 
typically followed by an extended yet temporary period of booming construction in 
high-income regions, we observe no such surge in construction in middle-income 
regions (Chart A).6 At the same time, we find evidence of a permanent negative shift 
in the level of industrial gross value added in middle-income regions and a positive 
shift in high-income regions. In terms of sectors other than construction, some 
studies find that moderate flooding can boost agricultural production in the year 
following a flood, perhaps as a result of greater rainfall boosting agricultural 
productivity in future harvests.7 But this effect seems to dissipate with severe 
flooding, possibly due to soil erosion offsetting the beneficial impact of rain.

These sectoral trends hint at the importance of promptly addressing 
infrastructure damage to avoid permanent output losses (Chart B). In high-
income regions, the event is followed by more investment and higher GDP, 
consistent with the reconstruction boom implied by the sectoral developments. There 
is evidence of higher total factor productivity in these regions too, showing that it may 
be possible to “build back better”. However, this higher investment does not occur in 
middle-income regions.

Insurance coverage and economic development are key for local and regional 
European economies to take advantage of risk-sharing mechanisms which can 
help alleviate local economic damage. Economic and institutional characteristics 
that strongly correlate with income, such as financial constraints, quality of 
governance and public infrastructure, may affect long-run economic outcomes.8,9 
Higher rates of insurance coverage can hasten reconstruction and reduce the long-
run impact of flooding. That said, only a quarter of climate-related damages are 
currently covered by insurance in Europe, with the share of coverage below 5% in 
some economies.10 The ECB, together with the European Insurance and 
Occupational Pension Authority (EIOPA), has recently outlined a potential EU-level 
solution to bolster catastrophe insurance provision, building on existing national and 
EU structures.11

The economic impact of flooding also spreads beyond the immediately 
affected areas through supply-chain linkages. A study of the 2021 floods in 
Belgium highlights significant disruption to those firms directly affected by the

event.12 These companies saw their sales fall by an average of 15%, and there was 
an increased likelihood of failure. At the same time, firms in unaffected regions also 
suffered reduced sales when their suppliers were affected. These supply-chain-
induced disruptions lasted for a year following the floods, as firms found it difficult to 
quickly reorient supply chains away from long-run suppliers.

While it is essential to eliminate carbon emissions to contain the frequency 
and potency of floods in the future, it is possible to lower their incidence and 
likelihood at shorter horizons. Evidence shows that adaptation by increasing the 
stock of capital devoted to flood defences significantly reduces the incidence of 
flooding two to four years later.13 It is, however, less certain that these defences 
reduce damage once a severe flood occurs. Reiterating the above results, 
institutional and economic differences across regions are likely to play a crucial role 
in determining adaptation. Investment in flood defence capital is more likely to be 
carried out in high-income regions with high-quality institutions. Improvements in 
legal frameworks and financial innovation are thus needed at both national and 
European levels to alleviate the current substantial adaptation financing gap.14

Contacts pointed to subdued business momentum at the turn of the year, with 
flat or declining manufacturing output but more resilient growth in services 
activity (Chart A and Chart B). Weakness in manufacturing was increasingly 
viewed as structural, reflecting high energy and labour costs, an inhibitive regulatory 
environment and increased import competition. Growth in services activity was 
driven both by consumer spending and by demand for business services focused on 
efficiency and the transformation of business models.

Subdued manufacturing activity continued to weigh on investment, but a focus 
on efficiency stimulated demand for some business services. Most contacts in 
the manufacturing sector said that activity had disappointed relative to expectations 
in 2024, which had been for a mild recovery. Instead, demand had remained fairly 
flat at low levels and the downturn was increasingly viewed as structural. Many cited 
the surge in energy and labour costs in recent years, which had not been borne to 
the same extent by competitors in other parts of the world. They also cited a more 
onerous regulatory regime, coupled now with uncertainty regarding future tariffs. 
This, together with still relatively high interest rates, created a bad climate for 
investment in new machinery and equipment, with many firms seeking to reduce 
capacity in the euro area. There was, however, growth in demand for goods and 
services that would help firms cut costs, reduce carbon emissions and transform 
their business or make it more resilient. Consequently, capital goods firms that 
delivered more efficient or green technologies saw good or recovering demand. 
Moreover, business service providers reported rapidly growing demand for AI and 
cyber security, which also stimulated demand for related consultancy services.

By contrast with manufacturing, there were slightly more positive reports from 
the construction and real estate sector. Construction activity was still held back by

a lack of housebuilding, reflecting high costs and long approval processes, as well as 
a lack of public spending and decision making, especially in Germany and France. 
However, non-residential construction (particularly data centres, green and telecoms 
infrastructures) continued to grow, the real estate market showed signs of recovery 
and residential construction was expected to recover over the course of 2025.

Overall, however, contacts did not expect any substantial change in business 
momentum in the short term. Economic and political uncertainty was very high 
following the collapse of governments in Germany and France and the lack of clarity 
as to the policies that would be pursued by the incoming government in the United 
States. Therefore, confidence was unlikely to improve significantly in the short term. 
But many remained hopeful for a stronger recovery later in 2025, when there should 
be greater clarity regarding economic policies in the euro area and globally.

The employment outlook remained weak, given many firms’ focus on raising 
efficiency and productivity. Many manufacturing firms were laying off staff, while 
others had adopted a cautious approach to hiring. Employment placement agencies 
reported another quarter of declining business in most countries and sectors as well 
as a low rate of conversion of temporary contracts into permanent ones. Several said 
that staff turnover was low, as employees were more reluctant to change jobs and 
potential destination companies did not offer the necessary salary inducements. 
Despite “structural tightness” in labour markets in some areas, there were fewer 
reports of labour shortages than there had been for a long time, making recruitment 
easier in sectors that were growing.

Contacts reported moderate price growth, with a slight pick-up, on average, 
particularly in the services sector (Chart A and Chart C). Manufacturing prices 
were reportedly quite stable overall. Prices were said to be increasing modestly in 
the capital goods sector (as companies sought to pass on rising costs), stable in the 
consumer goods sector and declining for intermediate goods (reflecting both weak 
demand and declining prices for many raw materials). In the construction sector, the 
prices of most building materials were declining, although increasing carbon 
emission prices and a shift towards less carbon-intensive – but more expensive – 
cement was putting upward pressure on average cement prices. Services prices 
were growing more robustly. This largely reflected the higher labour content of many 
business and consumer services, as well as the continued willingness of customers 
to accept higher prices, including, most notably, those for tourism-related services. 
Retailers mostly reported stable or moderate price increases in a context of rising 
costs but also a competitive environment with price-sensitive customers. Contacts 
also reported a pick-up in energy and transport services prices. The former mainly 
reflected higher prices for gas given lower storage levels. The latter partly reflected 
increased regulatory costs, and partly rising shipping rates due to continued limited 
supply and strong demand in recent months.2

models that were already largely “local for local”. Some said it was only the more 
sophisticated products that they exported from the euro area to the United States. 
For such products, there was often little or no US competition and the cost of tariffs 
would be passed through to prices in the United States. The overriding concern of 
many, as far as their activity in the euro area was concerned, was the potential for 
trade diversion, especially if the United States were to hike tariffs disproportionately 
on goods from China. In the absence of protective EU measures, this led more 
contacts to expect a negative effect on prices in their sector in the euro area than a 
positive one (Chart E, panel b). In the event of protective measures and retaliation 
leading to a more generalised tariff war, it was much more likely that costs and 
prices would rise.

Some of the most significant changes to the collateral frameworks have been 
linked to supporting broad-based participation in longer-term refinancing 
operations (LTROs) and targeted longer-term refinancing operations 
(TLTROs). The ECB has accepted ACCs under the temporary framework since 
December 2011 as part of several measures aimed at supporting bank lending and 
money market activity, not least in the ECB’s first three-year LTROs (Chart A).3 
ACCs were initially accepted by around one third of euro area NCBs, but almost all 
euro area NCBs started accepting ACCs following the announcement in April 2020 
of pandemic collateral easing measures to support the significant recourse to TLTRO 
III.4 Eligibility expansions have generally been accompanied by the design of

A further step towards the simplification of the Eurosystem collateral 
framework has been taken with the discontinuation of the eligibility of two 
specific asset types under the general framework. This concerns retail mortgage-
backed debt instruments (RMBDs) and non-marketable debt instruments backed by 
eligible credit claims (DECCs). Their discontinuation is due to limited historical use 
and low demand compared to alternative ways of mobilising the underlying assets 
and allows a further simplification of the Eurosystem collateral framework.

With these changes, the Eurosystem collateral framework will continue to 
contribute to an effective, robust, flexible and efficient implementation of the 
ECB’s monetary policy. The changes will be implemented with the next regular 
update of the legal framework, but not earlier than the fourth quarter of 2025. In view 
of the upcoming preparatory work for the integration of pools of credit claims into the 
general framework, the eligibility of currently accepted pools of non-financial

corporate credit claims under the temporary framework will be maintained until at 
least the end of 2026. The same applies for credit claims benefiting from a 
pandemic-related partial public sector guarantee, which will largely have matured by 
then and will eventually be phased out. In any case, the Governing Council will 
maintain a broad collateral framework to facilitate the use of Eurosystem credit 
operations by counterparties.

Monetary policy communication is important for managing expectations and 
enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy in the pursuit of price stability. 
The primary means of conveying monetary policy decisions is through statements 
and announcements made following the Governing Council’s monetary policy 
meetings, which are typically held every six weeks. However, further communication 
between these meetings – in the form of speeches, interviews and an account of the 
last meeting – also plays a significant role in shaping policy expectations.

Shifts in expectations as a result of communication can be assessed by 
measuring the high-frequency changes in asset prices that occur around 
monetary policy events. Tracking the impact of communication between monetary 
policy meetings helps arrive at a better understanding of changes in monetary policy 
expectations by building a more comprehensive overview of the ECB’s policy 
direction and its intentions.1

Looking at the ECB’s monetary policy communication across a variety of 
outlets offers deeper insights into their effectiveness in shaping expectations. 
To analyse the market impact of the ECB’s communication, the sample of monetary 
policy events (monetary policy press releases and press conferences) in Altavilla et 
al. (2019), is broadened by including communication between Governing Council 
meetings, such as relevant speeches related to the conduct of monetary policy given 
by the President of the ECB.2 Another source of information comes from Bloomberg 
news headlines referring to the ECB and monetary policy, and marked most relevant 
by Bloomberg users. The release of the accounts of monetary policy meetings, 
which document the Governing Council’s discussions during these meetings, and the 
Economic Bulletin, which explains the rationale behind monetary policy decisions in 
light of the prevailing economic and financial conditions, are also included. The 
sample begins in 1999 and covers events up to October 2023. The number of 
communication events fluctuates over time, influenced by changes in institutional 
conventions, such as the number of monetary policy meetings of the Governing 
Council per year. Notably, the number of documented communication events 
increased during key periods such as the global financial crisis (2008-09), the

The evolution of the ECB’s communication reveals a shifting relative 
importance of topics in response to changing economic and financial 
conditions and policy environments. A probabilistic topic model filters six distinct 
topics across different types of ECB communication. Each topic is characterised on 
the basis of a list of salient words that have a high probability of being associated 
with that particular topic, thus ensuring a clear distinction among the different topics 
identified by the model. This approach enables changes in topics to be tracked over 
time. Chart A shows significant shifts in the prevalence of topics referred to in the 
ECB’s communication. Early communication focused on the creation of the euro, its 
introduction and the ECB’s institutional framework, with the topic of “Banknotes and 
euro adoption” declining after the 2000s. Prior to the global financial crisis, recurring 
topics included price developments (“Inflation”), “Economic fundamentals” and 
financial markets (“Financial system”). During the late 2000s and early 2010s, the 
focus shifted to financial market stress, banking supervision, the financial crisis and 
the following sovereign debt crisis (all within the topic of “Financial system”). The 
“Policy instruments” topic increased in prevalence from the mid-2010s to 2021, as 
policy interest rates were close to the lower bound and unconventional measures 
had been adopted. The post-pandemic inflation surges that started in 2021 then led 
to a resurgence in communication with a focus on inflation. Finally, since 2020, new 
topics with less direct relevance to monetary policy decisions, such as climate 
change, the energy transition, digitalisation and gender parity (all classified in the 
dataset under “Other topics”), have gained in prevalence.

The impact of different ECB communication events varies significantly, with 
communication immediately after monetary policy meetings and 
communication between meetings contributing differently to market 
movements. Meetings of the Governing Council are associated with the largest 
movements in risk-free and sovereign yields, while communication between these 
meetings has a substantially smaller average impact (Table). Given the large 
number of speeches delivered by the ECB’s President, the mean absolute change 
per speech is smaller than that of the more infrequent statements and 
announcements following Governing Council meetings. However, the cumulative 
effect of frequent communication between monetary policy meetings reaches a level 
comparable to the market impact of the Governing Council’s meetings over the 
sample period. Speeches given by the ECB’s President, in particular, lead to 
significant cumulative yield movements that are similar in scale to those arising from 
monetary policy press releases and press conferences combined. In contrast, the 
accounts of monetary policy meetings and Bloomberg headlines have a much 
smaller cumulative impact on yields.

Consistent with the literature, the distribution of yield impacts triggered by 
monetary policy press releases and press conferences exhibits “fat tails”.4 
Yield responses to monetary policy announcements are generally small, but 
significant announcements lead to substantial asset price reactions, resulting in a fat-
tailed distribution. This can be seen from panel a) in Chart B, where the width at 
each point of the “violin” plot reflects the density of the data. Most values are 
concentrated around zero and the thin tails indicate occasional, larger responses. 
The “fat tails” are an even more pronounced feature in the distributions of the impact 
of communication between meetings, owing to the more muted market reaction in 
general and fewer significant events, despite some important events occurring 
between meetings that have a very high market impact in the tails of the distribution.5

Communication both accompanying Governing Council meetings and in the 
period between meetings is essential for effectively conveying and shaping 
the ECB’s monetary policy. Communication plays a crucial role in shaping 
monetary policy outcomes. While press conferences following Governing Council 
meetings serve as the primary channel for announcing policy decisions, 
communication between Governing Council meetings is also important for tracking 
the evolution of policy discussions. Although the impact of communication between 
meetings tends to be smaller than that of press conferences, its frequency amounts 
to a significant cumulative effect over time. Communication between meetings not 
only explains policy decisions and ensures accountability and transparency but also 
shapes policy expectations.

Estimates of the natural rate of interest, or r*, show trends that are of 
fundamental significance for monetary policy, but are subject to important 
caveats. r* is defined as the real rate of interest that is neither expansionary nor 
contractionary. Measures of r* are typically constructed as an equilibrium value 
towards which interest rates tend to gravitate in the medium to long term, as 
aggregate saving and investment imbalances abate and the inflationary or 
disinflationary pressures that may have developed as a consequence of those 
imbalances dissipate. These measures are also informative regarding the risk of 
short-term interest rates becoming constrained by their effective lower bound. 
However, available measures of r* are fraught with measurement and model 
specification challenges and are highly uncertain, reflecting, to different degrees, 
model, parameter, filter and real-time data uncertainty. While estimates of r* provide 
complementary information for monetary policy decisions and aid communication on 
the stance of monetary policy, these cannot be seen as a mechanical gauge of 
appropriate monetary policy at any point in time. In conducting monetary policy, 
there is no alternative to taking decisions on the basis of a comprehensive analysis 
of the data and their macroeconomic implications. In the euro area, in particular, the 
focus of such an assessment is threefold: the inflation outlook in light of the incoming 
economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of 
monetary policy transmission.

Ranges of point estimates from different r* models indicate a very high degree 
of model uncertainty. Model uncertainty is the variability in estimates of r* that 
arises from using different models. Since r* is unobservable, economists rely on a 
range of models to estimate it. These models may incorporate different definitions of 
the benchmark rate, for example the instrument used by the central bank to conduct 
monetary policy. Different models may also rely on alternative determinants, such as 
measures of economic slack or the time horizons over which inflation eventually 
stabilises. Models can be clustered by type of measure – such as slow-moving 
equilibrium measures and cyclical inflation-stabilising measures. Slow-moving r* 
measures are anchored to long-run economic trends but may not capture short-term 
fluctuations. Cyclical r* measures reflect short-term dynamics and exhibit inflation-
stabilising properties but can be sensitive to temporary shocks and are less stable. 
Balancing these trade-offs is challenging.

Chart A shows a wide range of point estimates for the real natural rate. 
Following a modest post-pandemic increase, the updated range of point estimates of 
the real natural rate of interest for the euro area has remained broadly unchanged 
since the end of 2023 and is consistent with the estimates documented in Issue 1, 
2024 of the Economic Bulletin.1 We distinguish between four categories of 
measures. The median from survey-based measures is indicated by the red line. 
Measures shown by the dark blue area are derived from models of the term structure 
of interest rates. Those derived from semi-structural models are shown by the dark 
yellow area. Finally, three estimates derived from the Holston-Laubach-Williams 
(HLW) model are shown separately, by the light yellow area. The latter measures are

not available for the fourth quarter of 2024.2 Taking only the measures shown in the 
dark blue and dark yellow areas that were possible to update to the very end of 
2024, the most recent estimates of real r* span a range between -½% and +½% (see 
the dark blue and dark yellow intervals corresponding to the fourth quarter of 2024 in 
Chart A).3 The way to translate those measures into their nominal counterparts is 
measure-specific. Some of the models produce both real and nominal versions of r*, 
while others estimate only one version. In the latter case, the missing value must be 
derived by adding or subtracting the ECB’s 2% medium-term inflation target or the 
model-consistent medium-term inflation expectations from the model estimate. When 
the three estimates derived from versions of the HLW model are factored in, the 
range of real r* is -½% to 1% and the corresponding nominal range is 1¾% to 3%.4 
Referring only to those measures included in the dark blue and dark yellow areas for 
which an update to the end of 2024 is available, the estimates of the nominal r* from 
the most recent interval range between 1¾% and 2¼%. Given the estimation 
uncertainties highlighted in this box, such ranges should be viewed as merely 
indicative.

Natural rate estimates are further surrounded by uncertainties in model 
parameters. Point estimates typically display an outcome that is conditional on a 
single estimate of the model parameters – commonly the “most likely” value. 
However, the econometric methods used to estimate the model parameters generate 
a whole set of plausible alternative estimates. Bayesian estimation techniques, for 
example, concentrate on the probability distributions of parameters rather than on 
their fixed-point estimates. Embracing this approach allows the use of a distribution 
of values for each model’s r* estimate, which reflects the statistical uncertainty 
affecting the estimation of that model’s parameters. Taking one semi-structural 
model whose point estimate is included in the range shown in Chart A (the model by 
Brand and Mazelis, 2019), it can be seen that the parameter uncertainty surrounding 
each of the point estimates for r* can be quite large (Chart B, dark blue range).

An additional source of uncertainty comes from the fact that r* is an 
unobservable variable that must be inferred from observable data – a 
challenge known as filtering. Since r* cannot be observed directly, we must 
deduce it from the economic data that we can measure. Accordingly, additional filter 
uncertainty is associated with obtaining an informative signal from the data. Like 
parameter uncertainty, the filter uncertainty range is time-varying. Cumulatively, 
parameter and filter uncertainty together can span up to several percentage points 
(Chart B, light blue range) even for a single model.5

Different data samples and revisions in backdata amplify the impact of filter 
uncertainty, leading to large ex post variations in in-sample point estimates of 
r* and adding yet another layer of uncertainty. Model-specific estimates of r* can

vary significantly when observations are added or backdata are revised.6 Chart C 
illustrates the considerable extent of this sensitivity using the widely referenced 
approach of Holston, Laubach and Williams (2023). Over time, as updates become 
available, revisions in previously obtained estimates can be as large as 1 percentage 
point. Most recently, end-of-sample point estimates have varied by similar 
magnitudes from one quarter to the next.

Despite the uncertainties involved, tracking broad movements in the natural 
rate over time provides qualitative insights into underlying economic trends. 
Notwithstanding the uncertainties associated with estimating r*, its trends contain 
information about developments in saving-investment imbalances that may create 
inflationary or disinflationary pressures, as well as about the extent to which the 
short-term interest rate might become constrained by the lower bound. The 
persistently low estimates of r* over the period 2015-22 displayed in Chart A, for 
example, reflect the persistent weakness in aggregate demand at the time and the 
low inflationary pressures that it generated. While in the post-pandemic environment 
estimates suggest some increase in r*, current estimates continue to be measurably 
below those prevailing before the global financial crisis, pointing to still lingering 
lower-bound risks in the event of sufficiently large disinflationary shocks.

6 All unobserved variable estimates suffer from the issue of data revisions and differences in data 
vintages. As highlighted by Orphanides and van Norden (2002), real-time estimates of the output gap 
are particularly unreliable as a result of substantial data revisions. See Orphanides, A. and van Norden, 
S., “The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 
Vol. 84, No 4, November 2002, pp. 569-583.

The inherent uncertainties as well as conceptual shortcomings limit the 
usefulness of available natural rate estimates for conducting monetary policy 
in real time. Because of the multiple types of uncertainty and the focus on the short-
term interest rate instrument – as opposed to broader measures of financing 
conditions, which can have a stronger impact on spending – the usefulness of r* as 
an indicator to support the calibration of the monetary policy stance is greatly limited, 
making it difficult to use as a rate-setting norm at policy meetings. Many models 
used do not construe r* as stabilising inflation in line with target but as merely 
indicating levels towards which interest rates gravitate over the longer term. As a 
function of historical shocks, such “equilibrium” interest rate measures are also 
largely backward-looking. By the time that equilibrium level is expected to be 
reached, the economy may well have already been exposed to further shocks, 
possibly causing the equilibrium rate of interest to drift and requiring monetary policy 
to offset these shocks. Furthermore, the connection between an r* defined in terms 
of the short-term interest rate instrument of monetary policy and the broader 
economy may itself change, as monetary policy transmission depends on a broader 
set of financing conditions – including the cost and availability of bank credit, and 
prices in a range of asset markets. The link between the short-term interest rate 
instrument and broader indicators for monetary policy is state-contingent and 
typically not stable. Accounting for these conceptual shortcomings and uncertainties 
is crucial for interpreting r* estimates.

Competitiveness has returned to the top of the European agenda. Sustainable, 
long-term economic growth supports price stability and gives monetary policymakers 
more room for manoeuvre.1 Long-standing challenges related to low productivity 
growth, burdensome regulations and demographic headwinds have been 
exacerbated by geopolitical tensions, trade fragmentation and the prospect of 
persistently high energy prices. Recent reports by Mario Draghi and Enrico Letta 
have highlighted these challenges and the need for urgent and concrete action that 
will enable Europe to catch up and maintain a competitive edge over its global 
competitors.2,3 The priority of the incoming European Commission is to speed up the 
rate of reform and investment, placing a particular focus on innovation, 
decarbonisation and strategic autonomy.4

Competitiveness is a complex and multi-faceted concept that can be defined in 
various ways. Although there are multiple factors that interact with and influence 
competitiveness, the only sustainable long-term strategy to maintain a high level of 
competitiveness is robust productivity growth. This also boils down to ensuring that 
citizens enjoy a high standard of living. In light of current geopolitical tensions, 
competitiveness also needs to go hand-in-hand with resilience, i.e. the ability to 
withstand and adapt to shocks. By reducing those foreign strategic dependencies 
that create uncertainty and dampen investment, Europe can strengthen both its 
competitiveness and its economic security.

from previous Economic Bulletin articles that have focused on the external 
dimension and the potential implications energy shocks and corporate investment 
might have for European competitiveness.5 Sustainable, long-term growth and 
economic competitiveness and resilience are underpinned by favourable institutional 
frameworks and complementary, high-quality physical infrastructures. Achieving 
sustainable economic growth and maintaining a competitive edge while advancing 
the green transition depends on key factors such as productivity growth, firm 
dynamism (generally the rate at which firms enter, grow and exit the market), 
investment, innovation and digital technology diffusion. The macroeconomic and 
geopolitical environment, including demographics and trade relations, also influences 
institutions and infrastructures and frames the broader policy options and priorities.

Several studies show that low productivity growth in Europe is at the heart of 
the challenges it is facing in terms of competitiveness and that this is largely 
related to developments in the information and communication technology 
(ICT) sector. In the last few decades, productivity gains have gradually been slowing 
in many advanced economies.6 Weaker productivity growth in Europe compared 
with the United States (US) stems mainly from the lower productivity and lower 
economic weighting of ICT-intensive industries. Chart 1, panel a, illustrates that after 
catching up with the United States until 1995, the euro area productivity gap started 
to widen. These productivity differences reflect both lower capital deepening and 
total factor productivity (TFP) contributions to growth in GDP per hour worked.7 
Insight into whether this can be explained by the ICT revolution having less of an 
effect in Europe than in the United States can be obtained by studying the 
differences at sectoral level. Gordon and Sayed analysed the developments in the

Firm dynamism is weaker in Europe than in the United States. While firm 
dynamism has suffered a secular decline in both Europe and the United States, the 
latter has seen the formation of relatively more new firms and a lower number of 
bankruptcy declarations in recent years.9 In Europe, the average age of firms at the 
frontier, i.e. the most technologically advanced and productive firms within a 
particular industry, has increased substantially in recent decades. In the early 2000s 
frontier firms in manufacturing were on average 14 years old compared with over 20

years old today.10 Labour productivity growth tends to decline as firms age, which 
may point towards a lack of competition and a low churn rate at the productivity 
frontier in Europe. Indeed, there appears to be a connection between the lack of 
competition from new, innovative firms and the survival of mature firms at the 
frontier.11

Reducing financial constraints would support the development of innovative, 
young and small firms. Compared with their United States counterparts, Europe’s 
young, high-growth firms have a smaller economic footprint, with too few of them 
growing quickly and eventually making it to the top.12 These firms often face more 
severe financial constraints than their established counterparts due to investor risk 
aversion, a lack of relationships of trust and a reliance on intangible assets, which 
are more difficult to collateralise.13 Business dynamism has also been found to be 
lower in regions where the population is older (see also Section 3 below).14 Overall, 
the result is a European corporate ecosystem of relatively small and ageing firms 
that are unable to compete globally.15 Part of the solution lies in further integrating 
and developing capital markets in Europe, including risk capital markets such as 
venture capital, to complement the banking sector and enhance risk-taking 
capacity.16

Increasing investment, particularly in intangibles such as research and 
development (R&D) and in the diffusion of digital technology, could improve 
Europe’s productivity. As shown in Chart 1, panel b, the euro area allocates a 
smaller proportion of its GDP to ICT equipment and intellectual property products 
than the United States, with the gap widening in recent years.17 In addition, Europe 
focuses on marginal improvements in already mature technologies rather than in 
breakthrough innovation, meaning it is stuck in the “middle-technology trap”.18 In 
terms of digital uptake, recent firm level analysis for the euro area shows that the 
adoption of digital technologies could lead to an increase in firms’ productivity in the 
medium term. But the effect of digital adoption is heterogenous across firms and 
sectors, and not all digital technologies deliver significant productivity gains. One 
way to increase the productivity benefits of digitalisation could be more efficient and

effective institutions and governance structures, and complementary skills.19 At the 
same time, enhancing European firms’ scaling up could advance their digitalisation.20

Although the EU is lagging behind in R&D expenditure, its green innovation 
activity is still comparable to that of other major regions. In the EU, the 
expenditure on R&D as a percentage of GDP has been hovering around 2% in the 
last decade. This is much lower than in the United States and Japan, for example, 
and most recently was also below that of China (Chart 2, panel a), with most of the 
gap stemming from the private sector.21 On the positive side, green innovation 
activity in the EU (in terms of international patent families) remains comparable for 
now with that of other countries, such as Japan and the United States. China, 
however, has been catching up at a fast pace and surpassed other major regions in 
2021 (Chart 2, panel b).22 If Europe wants to maintain its strong role in cleantech 
innovation, it will have to focus on patenting and scaling up, and to tackle regulatory 
fragmentation to ensure it reaps the full benefits of the Single Market.

Institutions play a pivotal role in fostering a dynamic business environment, 
investment, innovation, and therefore productivity and competitiveness. 
Defined broadly, institutions encompass the formal and informal rules, norms and 
organisations that provide the structure for social, political and economic 
interactions. Research by the 2024 Nobel Laureates Acemoglu, Johnson and 
Robinson emphasises the importance of inclusive institutions that provide broad 
access to economic opportunities and protect individuals against abuses of power.23 
In addition to ensuring the rule of law and reducing corruption, institutions that 
support human capital development, such as educational systems, are crucial for 
enhancing competitiveness. Well-functioning institutions in these areas also ensure a 
skilled workforce, which is indispensable for productivity growth and innovation.24

Legal and regulatory frameworks significantly influence the business 
environment and firms’ investment decisions. Although most regulations are 
designed with the aim of protecting people’s health and the environment, they may 
have unintended economic and social consequences. Complex planning and 
approval procedures can be serious obstacles to investment, especially for small 
firms and in the context of the digital and green transitions. Regulations limiting the 
entry of firms into product and services markets, or constraining the use of certain 
technologies or data, can hinder the adoption of new technologies by increasing 
costs for new high-technology firms, therefore reducing competition and constraining 
technology spillovers.

23 Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. A., “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An 
Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No 5, pp.1369-1401, December 2001.

24 Glaeser, E. L., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F. and Shleifer, A., “Do institutions cause growth?”, 
Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 9, No 3, pp. 271-303, September 2004.

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

The complexity and variability of regulations across EU Member States create 
barriers to entry and increase compliance costs for businesses, making 
Europe less attractive compared with more streamlined regulatory 
environments like the United States. The European Investment Bank (EIB) 
Investment Survey has identified long-term barriers to firms’ investment decisions 
(Chart 3). More firms in Europe report major long-term barriers to investment than in 
the United States. While the availability of skilled staff is identified as the biggest 
barrier in both the EU and the United States, about twice as many firms in Europe 
report challenges such as higher energy costs, difficulties in accessing funding, and 
deficits in transport and digital infrastructure (see also Box 1). In a similar vein, more 
firms in the EU say that business and labour regulations are a major barrier to 
investment. While the difference does not seem to be very large, the EU average 
masks extensive heterogeneity across EU countries (see Chart 4, panel a). A 
similarly heterogeneous picture emerges regarding corporate restructuring 
processes, which need to be simplified, shortened and more harmonised. In 2019 
the average time to resolve insolvency in the EU was double (around two years) that 
in the United States (Chart 4, panel b).

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

The regulatory landscape in the United States is generally considered more 
business-friendly and focused on minimising bureaucratic hurdles to 
encourage innovation and investment. For example, the United States has a 
more flexible approach to environmental regulations and a less stringent data 
protection framework compared with the EU's General Data Protection Regulation. 
This can make it easier for companies to operate and invest in new technologies and 
green initiatives. According to the World Bank's Doing Business 2020 report, the 
average time to start a business in Europe varies considerably across countries and 
in many it is significantly longer than in the United States, highlighting the less

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

efficient and fragmented regulatory processes in the EU.25 The International 
Monetary Fund estimates that overall trade costs within Europe are equivalent to a 
sizeable ad valorem tariff of 44% for the average manufacturing sector compared 
with 15% between US states, and as high as 110% for services.26 A large part of 
these high costs in Europe is related to regulatory entry barriers, which remain 
particularly high, especially for services.

The recent reports by Enrico Letta and Mario Draghi also point to regulatory 
burden and fragmentation, which limit the ability of EU companies to scale up 
and compete internationally. Completing the Single Market and streamlining and 
harmonising business regulations where appropriate will be key to changing this. 
Examples include proposals to create a new business code as a 28th regime for 
European innovative companies (with a harmonised and limited set of regulations 
that would allow innovative firms to expand quickly across the entire EU), and steps 
towards harmonising national insolvency frameworks.27 More expedient and 
harmonised procedures for cleantech applications could be another area to explore. 
A first step in this direction is the unitary patent system launched in 2023, which 
makes it possible to acquire patent protection in 17 EU Member States by submitting 
a single request to the European Patent Office.

To address long-term barriers to investment related to access to financing, 
deeper capital markets and financial integration are essential. This could help 
create a unified and thus deep and liquid capital market, enabling firms to access a 
diverse range of funding sources, including venture capital. Increased access to risk 
capital could enable companies to boost investment in intangibles and R&D, 
including breakthrough innovations, while supporting financing for the green and 
digital transitions. A detailed discussion into these issues is beyond the scope of this 
article but is extensively covered in other ECB publications.28

High-quality public institutions, as reflected in the efficient functioning of 
public administration, law enforcement and transparency, are prerequisites for 
the successful design and implementation of sound economic policies. One 
way to identify areas where improvements are needed most is to look at the World 
Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) data set. It summarises how 
companies, citizens and experts view the quality of governance. About half of EU 
countries have seen a deterioration in their composite ranking in the WGI over the

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

Administrative capacity is also part of governance and a particularly critical 
factor in facilitating investment during the green and digital transitions. The 
European Commission has recognised the importance of robust administrative 
frameworks in driving these transitions. The European Green Deal and the 2030 
Digital Compass highlight the need for strong administrative systems to ensure that 
funds are allocated efficiently and that projects meet stringent environmental and 
technological standards.29 The recent experience with the Recovery and Resilience 
Facility (RRF) also highlighted the obstacles to the timely and effective absorption 
and use of funds related to administrative capacity bottlenecks, which was in part 
related to the RRF’s complex reporting and control system.30 Well-developed 
administrative capacity can streamline the application, permit and screening 
processes, thus reducing the delays and uncertainties that often hinder investment.

Education and upskilling/reskilling to offset negative demographics

Educational systems play a key role in strengthening human capital and 
innovation. To enable technological change and innovation and to take advantage 
of the associated opportunities they offer, high-quality education systems alongside 
effective upskilling and reskilling programs are crucial. The latest results from the

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) underscore the need for 
Europe to continue improving its educational outcomes (Chart 6). According to the 
2022 PISA results, several European countries, such as Estonia, Ireland and 
Finland, performed well on average in science, mathematics and reading. Compared 
with 2018, scores in most EU countries deteriorated significantly. This can only be 
partially attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic, as scores were already falling pre-
pandemic.31 Significant disparities in educational performance remain in the EU, 
which continues to lag behind the United States and Japan.

In addition to education systems, reskilling and upskilling are essential to 
adapt to the rapidly changing demands of the labour market driven by the 
digital and green transitions. The European Skills Agenda for sustainable 
competitiveness, social fairness and resilience emphasises the importance of lifelong 
learning and continuous skills development.32 The Agenda aims to equip the 
workforce, including managers, with the skills needed to thrive in emerging industries 
and to support the EU’s goals in the digital and green transitions.33 Europe needs to 
intensify its focus on education and skills development to catch up with the United 
States in technological innovation and diffusion. As mentioned at the beginning of 
Section 3, having skilled employees is also a major long-term barrier to business 
investment in Europe. The European Centre for the Development of Vocational 
Training (Cedefop) highlights the importance of skills intelligence and workforce 
planning. More integrated and forward-looking strategies in Europe to address skills 
shortages and mismatches are needed to achieve a more technologically advanced,

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

greener and fairer future.34 The importance of skills to address challenges on the 
competitiveness front is also highlighted in the Letta report, including the 
simplification of degrees and improved certification recognition across Europe.

Negative demographic developments represent a challenge for Europe’s 
labour supply both in terms of quantity and skills. However, the relationship with 
productivity growth is less certain. In the years to come, older cohorts will make up 
an increasing part of the labour force. Their retirement will result in a reduced labour 
supply and shortages of certain skills, while there is no conclusive evidence of 
productivity gains from the younger cohorts being more formally educated.35 
Acemoglu and Restrepo36 show that higher capital investments, such as greater 
adoption of robots and other automation technologies, could mitigate and even 
reverse the negative relationship between age and productivity. At the same time, 
older workers may be ill-equipped for a work environment which is rapidly adopting 
new technologies.

Migrants are an important part of the European labour force and can help 
boost the labour supply and productivity, particularly against the backdrop of 
ageing populations.37 Research shows that migration can have positive effects on 
productivity and long-term economic growth.38 In recent years, amid high labour 
market tightness in Europe, migration has helped alleviate labour shortages and 
moderate wage growth, particularly in the hospitality, support services and 
construction sectors where entry barriers based on qualifications or language are 
lower.39 Nonetheless, addressing the high degree of overqualification and skills 
mismatches experienced by migrants compared with permanent residents and 
nationals, could further help address labour and skills shortages and raise labour 
productivity gains.40 The lower educational attainment levels of second-generation 
students in some countries also highlight problems related to the success of 
immigration or integration policies.

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

Physical and digital infrastructures complement the intangible institutions around which society is 
organised. High-quality infrastructures support a well-connected economy by facilitating the efficient 
movement of goods, services and people.41 Sufficient and well-maintained physical and digital 
infrastructures and networks make economies of scale possible and lower production costs. 
Transport, telecommunications and energy grids are particularly relevant drivers of economic 
growth and thus competitiveness.42 Nevertheless, European countries require a significant amount 
of investment to upgrade their physical and digital infrastructures.

Given Europe’s geography, land transport infrastructures, such as roads and railways, are essential 
for seamless regional integration and trade. Chart A illustrates that, on average, the quality of 
transport infrastructure in Europe is lower compared with the United States and Japan. Modernising 
and enhancing Europe’s train network could reduce bottlenecks, improve cohesion within the Single 
Market and support sustainable logistics to support the green transition.43 There is still untapped 
potential for many direct train connections across major European cities that are instead often 
covered by flight connections, which have a much larger carbon footprint.44

With technology advancing rapidly, digital infrastructures and telecommunications are of particular 
importance today. However, Europe is still a long way from achieving its connectivity targets,

ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2025 – Articles 
European competitiveness: the role of institutions and the case for structural reforms

particularly regarding high-speed internet and 5G coverage.45 Fragmented national telecoms 
markets in Europe hinder progress on digital connectivity. This fragmentation contrasts with more 
unified markets in the United States and China, which benefit from fewer and larger operators. As a 
result, Europe suffers higher communication costs and the slower innovation and diffusion of 
advanced digital technologies, including artificial intelligence, which are crucial for the digital 
transition.46

Finally, Europe’s fragmented energy grid, with few connections and large disparities in investment 
and regulation across countries, implies a toll on the green transition to renewables. This 
fragmentation exacerbates regional disparities in energy costs, reducing competitiveness for 
industries reliant on affordable energy.47 A resilient energy grid is also crucial for achieving energy 
security, especially amid heightened geopolitical tensions. A cohesive European energy market with 
a resilient grid would lower costs for consumers and bring more stability to energy prices, which in 
turn facilitates monetary policy.

Europe faces critical challenges in boosting productivity, investment and 
innovation, and therefore its competitiveness and resilience. Long-standing 
challenges related to low productivity growth, burdensome regulations and 
demographic headwinds have been compounded by geopolitical tensions, trade 
fragmentation and the prospects of persistently higher energy prices. Addressing 
these challenges requires comprehensive structural reforms targeting higher 
regulatory efficiency, enhanced governance and administrative capacity, improved 
quality of education and skills’ matching, and modernised infrastructure. The 
population is shrinking, and our societies are ageing, so sustaining the workforce will 
rely on higher participation rates, especially among women and older people, 
alongside well-designed immigration policies to address labour shortages and 
support long-term growth.

Mario Draghi’s proposals for enhancing European competitiveness and Enrico 
Letta’s proposals for empowering the Single Market highlight the need for 
coordinated action at the national level supported by more EU where it adds 
the most value.48 National policies must prioritise increasing productivity growth 
through measures that support business dynamism, the adoption of technology, the 
financing of private investment and breakthrough innovations, and that address 
labour shortages and skill mismatches. At the EU level, the re-focusing of policy 
required could be facilitated by coordination based on agreed EU priorities. In 
addition, EU-level action is needed to provide essential public goods, including

affordable and greener energy, breakthrough research and digital infrastructure for a 
wider diffusion of advanced technologies, especially artificial intelligence. “More 
Europe where it matters” also requires deepening the Single Market and 
strengthening cross-border, market-based risk sharing.

This article joins the call for urgent and concrete structural reforms in Europe. 
The interplay between institutions, infrastructures and competitiveness underscores 
the need for transformative policy action. Addressing structural barriers, including 
inadequate physical and digital infrastructures and skill mismatches, while increasing 
access to finance, would enhance the potential for growth. Structural reforms would 
then also facilitate the smooth transmission of monetary policy to the whole euro 
area economy and thereby help preserve price stability in the euro area.49 At the 
same time, such reforms and policies need to be shaped with a view to supporting 
the green and digital transitions and ensuring economic and social resilience to 
geopolitical tensions and possible future shocks. Crucially, improving the social 
acceptability of reforms and ensuring balanced regulation are key to their success.50 
Overall, policies need to be carefully designed, striking a balance between regulation 
and flexibility. This should ensure the protection of public interest without 
compromising on innovation and investment and therefore contribute towards 
sustainable improvements in European productivity and overall living standards.

Wages are key to the assessment of inflation and thus for monetary policy. 
Inflation both shapes and is shaped by wage developments. Wages represent an 
input cost to firms. In turn, productivity-adjusted wages affect firms’ price-setting 
decisions and thus inflationary pressures, while workers base wage claims on 
current and past inflation and on inflation expectations. Moreover, wages represent a 
significant part of income for households and therefore affect consumption and 
saving decisions.

The past decade has seen significant changes in the conditions for wage 
growth, in terms of both price pressures and labour market conditions. The 
period from 2013 to 2017 was characterised by high albeit declining labour market 
slack, low inflation and subdued productivity growth which, together with some 
structural factors, kept a lid on wage growth. While inflation began to gradually pick 
up from 2018 and labour market tightness was increasing, wage growth remained 
low.1 During the pandemic, headline inflation was muted, as were underlying wage 
dynamics, while both the unemployment rate and wages were affected by 
government measures to cushion the economic impact of the pandemic shock.2 
Following the post-pandemic reopening of the economy and Russia’s unjustified 
invasion of Ukraine, inflation in the euro area increased to historically high levels 
which, combined with a tight labour market, resulted in historically high euro area 
wage growth. Headline inflation began declining considerably in 2023, while there 
have also been signs of weakening labour demand and wage growth has gradually 
been easing from a high level.3

Such changes in the macroeconomic environment create challenges for 
assessing the relative importance of the drivers of wages. While lessons can be 
learned from the low inflation period, the changing economic landscape and data 
distortions during the pandemic require a reassessment of the standard tools and an 
extension of data sources used to analyse wage growth. Against this background, 
this article examines the drivers of wage growth in the extraordinary post-pandemic 
period (2022-24) through an augmented wage Phillips curve and through the

Following the surge in inflation, wage growth increased to levels not seen 
since before the advent of the monetary union, but different indicators 
accelerated at different speeds. CPE growth was the first of the wage indicators to 
follow the rise in euro area inflation, and in 2022 it was already above 4%. At that 
time CPH growth was about 1 percentage point lower. The difference reflected the 
recovery of average hours worked after the pandemic, which contributed to CPE 
growth on top of the more slowly rising hourly compensation. As the growth in 
average hours worked slowed down, the two measures began to grow at similar 
rates of above 5% in 2023. In contrast, negotiated wage growth strengthened more 
gradually, from just above 1% in 2021 to close to 3% in 2022 and above 4% in 2023. 
This more gradual adjustment reflected the fact that wage negotiations took some 
time to restart after the pandemic and were lengthy. Much of the difference between 
CPE and negotiated wages is captured by the wage drift, which made a much 
stronger than normal contribution to actual wage growth in the early stages of the 
high inflation period.6 This high wage drift reflected not only the recovery in average 
hours worked but also ad hoc inflation compensation at firm level, partly incentivised 
by preferential tax treatments. As formal wage negotiations began to directly reflect 
inflation compensation, the wage drift component started to decline again, which was 
also reflected in a greater similarity between CPE and negotiated wage growth.