The protests and subsequent regime change came amidst a challenging global and domestic context. Global 
growth is projected to remain subdued at 2.6 percent this year and 2.7 percent in 2025-26, due to geopolitical 
tensions and continued fiscal consolidation.1 Geopolitical risks are high with the ongoing war between Russia and 
Ukraine and the escalation of the conflict in the Middle East.

Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed to 5.2 percent in FY24 from 5.8 percent in FY23, before the onset of 
the protest and political turmoil. This was the second consecutive year that economic growth had decelerated, 
driven by weak consumption and exports growth. High inflation and the resulting contractionary monetary policy, 
higher energy prices, and import restrictions hampered investment. On the supply side, industrial growth declined 
relatively significantly in FY24, but the growth of the services and agriculture sectors have held steady.

Inflation averaged 9.7 percent in FY24, up from 9 percent in FY23, and continued to erode consumer purchasing 
power. To combat elevated inflation, Bangladesh Bank (BB) continued to tighten monetary policy in FY24 and the 
first quarter (Q1) of FY25. Despite the introduction of an interest rate targeting framework in FY23, inflation 
increased in FY24 due to high food and energy prices and higher import prices as a result of a depreciating taka. 
The monetary transmission mechanism was weak due to a cap on lending rates, which was removed only in May 
2024. The real policy rate remains negative.

The banking system continued to face tight liquidity conditions and private sector credit growth slowed in FY24. 
The non-performing loan (NPL) ratio remains elevated, and even this elevated ratio masks the true extent of 
banking sector stress due to lax definitions and inadequate reporting standards, forbearance measures, and weak 
regulatory enforcement. BB has introduced a Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) framework to address the 
vulnerabilities in the banking sector.

The current account deficit (CAD) narrowed to US$6.5 billion in FY24 from US$11.6 billion in FY23 due to a 
substantial contraction in imports and robust remittances. The increase in remittances was driven by the 
depreciation of the taka and various incentives offered by the government and banks. The narrowing of the CAD 
helped the overall balance of payments (BoP) deficit to decline to US$4.3 billion in FY24 from US$8.2 billion in 
FY23.2 In May 2024, BB devalued the exchange rate and adopted a crawling peg to transition to a more market-
determined exchange rate system. Foreign exchange (FX) reserves declined by approximately US$3 billion during 
FY24 to US$21.7 billion. Reserves continued to decline in the first quarter of FY25 amid the uprisings and despite 
fewer FX interventions by BB, but there are signs that it has stabilized at just under US$20 billion.

The fiscal deficit was estimated at 4.5 percent of GDP in FY24, similar to the 4.6 percent deficit in FY23. Revenue 
and expenditure as a percent of GDP also remained at similar levels to the previous year. The public debt-to-GDP 
ratio is estimated to have increased to 38.8 percent, but it remains sustainable. To contain subsidies, the

Real GDP growth is projected to decline to 4.0 percent in FY25 but could range between 3.2 and 5.2 percent due 
to the uncertain impact of the protest and political transition. The country is still recovering from the popular 
protests and political turmoil which significantly impacted economic activities in Q1 FY25. Political uncertainty, 
inadequate law and order, and labor unrest in the industrial area continued to weigh on the complete 
normalization of the activities.

Private consumption, investment, and exports are expected to experience slower growth due to inflationary 
pressures, tight financing conditions, and economic and political uncertainties. Growth is expected to accelerate 
to 5.5 percent in FY26, as exports and investment benefit from the recovery of the economy. Inflation is expected 
to moderate by the end of FY25. To counter inflationary pressures, the BB is likely to maintain a contractionary 
monetary policy stance. Vulnerabilities in the financial sector, driven by high NPLs, may hamper effective 
interbank financial intermediation. Slower expenditure growth constrained by subdued revenue mobilization will 
keep the fiscal deficit below 5 percent in the near term. Strong growth in workers’ remittances inflows and export 
growth, albeit at a relatively moderate level, are expected to narrow the CAD in FY25-F26. There are reportedly 
significant external payments due related to the imports of energy and fertilizer.

There are significant downside risks to this outlook, stemming from global and domestic factors. Increased political 
instability, poor corporate governance, and the likely insolvency of some banks could worsen an already weak 
financial sector and weigh on economic activity. Escalating geopolitical tensions and increased protectionism 
could lead to a surge in global commodity prices and supply chain disruptions. Weaker than anticipated growth in 
trade partners could also weigh on exports growth.

Bangladesh faces significant challenges in job creation, job quality, skills shortages, and skills mismatches. The 
student-led protests in Bangladesh were initially sparked by demands to withdraw the quota system3 in public 
sector jobs but were driven by deeper economic and social challenges. Decades of relatively rapid growth have 
not generated sufficient jobs for an expanding working-age population. The structural transformation from 
agriculture to manufacturing and services that had been sustained since 2000 has slowed down in recent years as 
excess labor has been absorbed in the agriculture sector. As a result, from 2016 to 2022 most new jobs were in 
the low-wage, low-productivity agriculture sector and by contrast new urban employment growth declined. The 
manufacturing sector grew annually by 9.1 percent but experienced a 9.6 percent decline in jobs. Real wages 
across all sectors have declined. Gender disparity in the labor market is significant. Given the constraints in the 
labor market, emigration has been a critical source of employment for many Bangladeshis.

The private sector will need to generate more jobs, but most firms in Bangladesh are small and face significant 
obstacles to growth. The informal sector accounts for 84.9 percent of total employment but is limited by low 
productivity. Large industries have stagnated in job creation, and foreign direct investment (FDI) remains low due 
to a challenging business environment. The share of tertiary-educated youth among who are unemployed has 
increased to 27.8 percent, as many struggle to find jobs that align with their skills and educational qualifications. 
There is a growing mismatch between the competencies of graduates and the skills and knowledge demanded by 
employers. To address these challenges, Bangladesh needs a comprehensive policy approach that improves the

business environment, attracts foreign investment, promotes export diversification, and enhances education and 
technical training systems to align with employer demands. The Special Focus section of this report delves more 
deeply into the jobs challenge in Bangladesh.

Bangladesh's economic growth over the past decade has faced significant challenges in recent years. Since FY23, 
Bangladesh has been grappling with a substantial BoP deficit, depletion of international reserves, and high rates 
of inflation. Existing and increasing vulnerabilities in the financial sector have also weighed on growth. The 
depletion of FX reserves precipitated an IMF program in January 2023 and the subsequent adoption of a crawling 
peg. The lack of job opportunities was considered an underlying discontent driving the student protests.

The global economy is stabilizing but the outlook remains subdued—both advanced economies and Emerging 
Market and Developing Economies (EMDEs) are projected to grow at a slower pace over 2024-26 than in the pre-
pandemic decade. Globally, inflationary pressures are anticipated to gradually ease, and headline inflation rates 
are expected to converge to levels broadly consistent with central bank targets by 2026. The multiple shocks of 
recent years have hindered per capita income catch-up, with almost half of EMDEs losing ground relative to 
advanced economies over 2020-24. Pronounced trade policy uncertainty could herald further trade restrictions 
and weigh on global trade.

Real GDP growth is estimated to have moderated to 5.2 percent in FY24, driven by weak consumption and 
exports growth on the demand side. Despite the improvement from the previous year, private consumption 
growth was still lower than the average of 5.7 percent in the previous decade, as elevated inflation affected 
consumption through reduced purchasing power (Figure 2). Government consumption slowed to coordinate fiscal 
policy with the contractionary monetary policy carried out in response to the high inflation. Capital expenditure 
also remained muted with the implementation rate of the Annual Development Programme (ADP) at only 80.9 
percent in FY24. Exports growth also moderated in FY24 due to rising input costs, weak global demand, and supply 
chain disruptions. The political turmoil severely affected economic activity in the first two months (July-August) 
of FY25 (see Box 1).

Box 1: Political Turmoil in July and August 2024 and its Immediate Economic Impact 
The protest started with demands to reform the quota system for government jobs, but following a brutal 
crackdown, the movement transformed into a widespread anti-government uprising leading to Prime 
Minister Sheikh Hasina’s resignation on August 5, 2024. The uprising, repression, violence, large-scale arrests, 
curfews, and internet shutdowns severely affected economic activity in July and August. Initially, the student-
led protests, which began in June, 2024, caused localized disruptions in transportation and service sector 
activities, primarily in Dhaka. However, following violent clashes on July 18 and 19, a curfew was imposed, and 
internet services were suspended, leading to a significant disruption of economic activity beyond Dhaka. The 
industrial and services sectors experienced a standstill, and key highway closures disrupted supply chains. 
Existing container congestion at Chattogram Port was exacerbated, and export shipments declined sharply.

On the supply side, industrial growth is estimated to have moderated to 5.8 percent in FY24. Industrial growth 
was affected by lower imports caused by a shortage of foreign currency in the banking system, rising interest 
rates, and high energy prices. Gas supplies were disrupted due to lower domestic production and the damage 
caused by cyclone Ramal to one of the two Floating Storage and Regasification Units (FSRU) in Bangladesh. 
Construction growth also slowed due to a rise in the building material price index by 6.1 percent and a decline in 
demand.

Average inflation increased to 9.7 percent in FY24 
from 9 percent in FY23 mainly due to high food and 
energy prices and higher import prices as a result of a 
depreciating taka. External factors such as Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine, and the conflict in the Middle East 
contributed to the elevated inflationary pressure 
through supply chain disruptions. The international 
prices of key commodities eased, but this did not 
translate to a significant reduction in inflation. 
Domestically, the primary contributors of persistent 
inflationary pressure were upward adjustments to 
administered energy and food prices and import 
restrictions. Monetary policy tightening and fiscal consolidation should help anchor inflation expectations and rein 
in inflation over the medium-term.

Inflation continued to increase in the first quarter of FY25 (averaging 10.7 percent) and in July reached 11.7 
percent – a 13-year high (Figure 3). The spike was caused by supply chain disruptions on the back of unrest social 
and political unrest in the lead up to the change in the political regime on August 5, 2024. Food inflation surged 
to 14.1 percent in July and averaged 11.9 percent in Q1. Inflation is now showing signs of moderation as food 
supply chain challenges begin to ease.

Several socioeconomic factors may have contributed to the demand for change by the protestors, including 
persistent poverty, vulnerability to falling into poverty, and limited opportunities in a rapidly urbanizing 
environment. Between 2016 and 2022, poverty reduction in rural areas outpaced urban areas, even as 
urbanization accelerated. By 2022, one in four Bangladeshis lived in urban settings, compared to fewer than one 
in five in 2016. As a result, a higher proportion of the poor population became urbanized, despite rural poverty 
being six percentage points higher than urban poverty. Vulnerability to poverty has shifted towards urban areas. 
About 20 percent of the population remains vulnerable to poverty due to shared characteristics with the poor. In 
2022, four in ten Bangladeshis were either poor or at risk of falling into poverty. Urban vulnerability grew, with 
more at-risk individuals living in cities by 2022.

Rising income inequality in urban areas is likely another contributor. Despite poverty reduction, income 
inequality has surged recently, particularly in urban regions. From 2010 to 2022, Bangladesh's Gini index—a

measure of income inequality—increased by nearly three points from 0.50 to 0.53. The Gini for consumption is 
much lower and has remained stagnant in the same periods. While income growth improved overall welfare, the 
benefits were distributed unevenly, especially in urban areas. The gap between rural and urban inequality 
widened between 2016 and 2022, contributing to a national rise in inequality. Another potential contributing 
factor, especially among the youth, is that educational improvements and better access to education have not 
translated into better welfare or lower inequality, whether measured by consumption or income. While inequality 
of opportunity in education nearly halved due to the expansion of primary education, the gap in consumption 
remained static. The labor market has failed to turn educational gains into economic ones. Labor markets have 
not adjusted to increasing levels of education in the workforce. In other words, better education has not been 
transmitted to better wages. Except for salaried jobs, which receive a premium but are limited, other forms of 
wage work or self-employment have not seen a rise in premium.

The lack of urban job opportunities for young graduates is another structural issue that may have contributed 
to tensions. National unemployment (i.e., 3.4 percent in 2022) figures hide the challenges faced by young, more 
educated cohorts in urban areas. Despite a decrease in the overall unemployment rate between 2016 and 2022, 
unemployment among young women remained high (i.e., 18 percent), with young men’s unemployment rate 
increasing by 2.5 percentage points (11 to 13 percent). Educated women face exceptionally high unemployment 
rates, and many are discouraged from entering the labor force due to a lack of suitable jobs, leading to increased 
inactivity rates among women (the inactivity rate increased by 7.7 p.p. during this period). Urban employment 
creation has been insufficient to absorb young workers, and job quality has deteriorated. The number of young 
people employed in urban areas declined, with many working in low-paying service sector jobs. Competition for 
jobs has intensified due to urbanization, particularly in Dhaka, with internal migration benefiting higher-skilled 
workers at the expense of lower-skilled job seekers.

Finally, the recent deterioration in labor market conditions and higher inflation may have also contributed to 
people’s discontent. Labor force participation declined from 61.2 in 2022 to 60.9 in 2023 and reached 59.9 percent 
in the first half of 2024. Employment has also declined, particularly in 2024, and the unemployment rate remained 
stagnant at around 3.5 percent. The reduction in labor force participation and employment with a constant 
unemployment rate indicates that discouraged workers are leaving the labor market as they cannot find jobs. 
Between FY23 and FY24, workers in industry and services have been especially affected, facing job losses (by 5.6 
and 4.1 percent, respectively) and wage reductions (by 2.3 and 0.7 percent, respectively), likely pushing their 
families into extreme poverty. Consequently, extreme poverty at the US$2.15 (2017 PPP) threshold is projected 
to increase by 0.7 percentage points (or affect 1.2 million people) in 2024. Some families—particularly families in 
agriculture or receiving remittances from abroad—have been able to maintain their welfare. The opposing trends 
have likely contributed to higher inequality, with the Gini index increasing by 1.1 points over the year.

Bangladesh Bank continued to tighten monetary policy in response to elevated inflation. It also made steps 
towards more market-determined interest rates via the discontinuation of the Six Month Moving Average Rate of 
Treasury Bills (SMART) interest rate system which was introduced at the start of 2024. Liquidity in the banking 
system remains constrained, contributing to heightened vulnerabilities within the financial sector. The interim 
government has initiated an initial set of reforms aimed at restoring discipline and stability in the banking sector, 
including restructuring the boards of underperforming banks and establishing a taskforce dedicated to overseeing 
banking sector improvements.

BB has tightened monetary policy further and attempted to move to more market-determined interest rates. 
In order to combat high inflation, BB increased the policy rate by 50 basis points to 9.5 percent in September 2024. 
The second consecutive 50 basis points increase. The policy rate has now been increased cumulatively by 475 
basis points since May 2022. However, the monetary policy transmission mechanism is weak given limited 
interbank financial intermediation. In addition, the efficacy of monetary policy is relatively limited when 
inflationary pressure is driven by supply-side factors such as supply chain disruptions. BB has made a concerted 
effort to improve the transmission mechanism and move towards more flexible market-driven interest rates with 
a series of measures, including the discontinuation of a lending rate cap in July 2023 and the variable SMART 
reference rate in May 2024. Despite the increase in the interest rates, the real policy rate, real weighted average 
lending, and deposit rates remain negative (Figure 4 and Figure 5).

Banking system liquidity has remained tight. Falling deposit growth, driven by the negative real deposit rates, 
has contributed to liquidity constraints in the banking system. Furthermore, a series of large-scale fraud 
allegations in the banking sector significantly dented public confidence, weighing on deposit growth. Moreover, 
sluggish recovery of the NPLs, increased cash holding by the public, and government borrowing from commercial 
banks have also contributed to the tightening liquidity situation. In the face of declining liquidity, the BB conducted 
liquidity support in the local currency market through various instruments.6 Liquidity support was also provided 
to some ailing Shariah-based Islamic Banks through facilities such as Special Liquidity Support (SLS), Mudarabah 
Liquidity Support (MLS), and the Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility (IBLF). Towards the end of FY24, reduced FX sales

by the BB also supported liquidity. The call money rate rose to 9.5 percent as of September 25, 2024, compared 
to 6.6 percent a year ago, reflecting tighter liquidity conditions in the banking sector. Rates on government 
treasury bills have also risen significantly over the past 12 months.

Money supply growth decelerated in FY24 and 
remained below the BB target. Broad money growth 
declined to 7.7 percent at the end of FY24, declining by 
2.8 percentage points compared to the previous year. 
The persisting BoP deficit and net sales of foreign 
exchange by BB led to a 7.7 percent decline in Net 
Foreign Assets (NFA). This was offset by a 10.9 percent 
increase in Net Domestic Assets (NDA). As a result, the 
growth in money supply remains well below the target 
of 10.0 percent announced by the BB in the January-
June 2024 Monetary Policy Statement (MPS). The broad 
money growth target has been reduced to 8.2 percent 
for December 2024 in the latest MPS released in July 2024.

Private and public sector credit growth moderated in 
FY24. Tight domestic liquidity conditions, rising interest 
rate, and a shortage of foreign currency holdings in 
banks weighed on private investment. Growth in total 
domestic credit moderated to 9.8 percent in FY24 from 
15.3 percent in FY23. This was led by a deceleration in 
private sector credit growth to 9.8 percent in FY24, 
down from 10.6 percent in the previous year. Public 
sector credit growth decelerated sharply to 9.7 percent 
in FY24 from 34.9 percent in FY23, due to lower 
borrowing needs compared to the previous year to 
finance the deficit.

Financial sector vulnerabilities are elevated. As the interim government begins to take stock of various sources 
of vulnerability in the financial sector, evidence of the extent of weak corporate governance is slowly being 
revealed. The volume of officially recognized stressed assets is likely to be affected over the next few months as 
a newly formed taskforce on banking completes its review. By the end of June 2024, officially recognized NPLs 
increased by 35.5 percent year-on-year. The gross NPL ratio (ratio of NPLs to total loans) increased to 12.6 percent 
at the end of FY24, compared to 10.1 percent at the end of FY23. However, the NPL ratio understates banking 
sector vulnerabilities due to lax regulatory definitions, inadequate reporting standards, repeated forbearance 
measures, and weak regulatory enforcement. Weak governance and political influence have exacerbated these 
challenges, distorting decision-making processes and hampering effective oversight in the sector. Loan loss 
provisions stood at 42.2 percent of NPLs at the end of June 2024, declining from the previous quarter and also y-
o-y. Furthermore, NPLs are concentrated in state-owned banks, which accounted for nearly 48.5 percent of the 
total NPLs. The capital adequacy ratio of the banking sector marginally declined to 10.6 percent at the end of FY24, 
down from 11.2 percent at the end of FY23, mainly driven by the fall of the ratio in private banks.

Since the formation of the interim government in August 2024, significant reforms have been initiated to restore 
discipline and stability within the banking sector. The BB has reformed boards of eleven banks and one non-bank 
financial institution, replacing members in institutions where boards have been captured by business groups 
engaged in questionable practices, such as related party lending, violation of single borrower exposure limits, 
money embezzlements, and money laundering to overseas bank accounts. These governance failures, 
compounded by weak internal control and poor compliance, appear to have contributed to massive deposit 
withdrawals and liquidity crisis in several banks, although the full data are not yet available. These issues may 
have resulted in elevated NPLs and capital inadequacy, posing a systemic risk to the financial sector.

BB has established a task force to address banking sector reforms. The six-member task force will focus on key 
issues such as distressed assets, NPLs, and governance failures. It will review the asset quality and the true extent 
of the capital position of the banks, particularly the weak banks, identify provisioning shortfalls, and assess 
liquidity conditions. Additionally, the task force will propose regulatory reforms. Priority reforms for the task force 
could include an independent and comprehensive asset quality review (AQR) of most banks by internationally 
reputed audit firms, review and strengthening of the governance framework, and introducing a modern resolution 
framework to recover or resolve banks. The bank resolution framework, including the recently established PCA, is 
urgently needed for immediate implementation along with the restructuring of the deposit insurance system. 
Overall, BB should be conferred with ample resolution powers in line with the Financial Stability Board Key 
Attributes for Effective Resolution Regimes.

BB has adopted a new approach to handle the liquidity situation. BB stopped injecting liquidity directly into the 
banking system since the change in government. Earlier the Shariah banks were receiving special liquidity support 
without any collateral starting from the end of 2022 to keep them in business. BB also introduced a special 
guarantee window to address acute liquidity stress by facilitating borrowing from the interbank money market. 
Three banks with restructured boards have already sought the BB guarantee facility for borrowing BDT 68 billion 
from the interbank money market. Overnight and two-week interbank interest rates increased from 7.7 and 9 
percent in September 2023 to 10.5 and 12.6 percent in September 2024, respectively. The advance-to-deposit 
ratio increased to 80.2 percent in June 2024 from 78.5 percent in June 2023. Yields on government securities are 
also increasing. The yield on six-month treasury bills rose to 11.8 percent in August 2024 and 10-year treasury 
bonds yielded over 12.6 percent in August 2024.

There were notable improvements in the regulatory framework. Through the long-awaited enactment of the 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act 2024 by the national parliament in July 2024, the payment, clearance, and 
settlement systems of the country now have a stronger legal basis with a mandate to BB for operation, oversight, 
and regulations. BB issued Guidelines on Licensing, Operation and Regulation of Credit Bureau in June 2024 which 
would allow banks to assess creditworthiness and repayment capacity of individuals, by gathering data from 
various sources, even if they are not existing bank customers. The establishment of such private credit bureaus 
can facilitate access to credit and financial inclusion.

The capital market is also undergoing various changes including restructuring of the boards of the two stock 
exchanges. The new leadership of the Bangladesh Securities and Exchange Commission (BSEC) has lifted the floor 
price of all shares except for two companies - Beximco Ltd. and Islami Bank7. The Dhaka Stock Exchange broad 
index (DSE-X) decreased by 7.8 percent (y-o-y) in August 2024. However, the index increased by 9.9 percent 
compared to July 2024 indicating a rebound in investors’ sentiment. In FY24, there were two Initial Public Offerings 
totaling BDT 800 million. Out of total twenty-five capital issues, fourteen were from non-financial corporates 
equivalent to BDT 67.8 billion.

The improvement in the current account deficit, driven by a decrease in imports and strong remittance inflows, 
offset the decline in the financial account surplus. On net, the overall balance of payments deficit contracted. The 
BB devalued the exchange rate from 110 BDT/US$ to 117 BDT/US$ and adopted a crawling exchange rate regime 
in May 2024, narrowing the gap between the official and kerb market rates, which contributed to greater stability 
in the foreign exchange market. Nevertheless, foreign exchange reserves decreased by approximately US$3 billion 
in FY24.

The current account deficit narrowed in FY24, driven by a substantial contraction in imports and rising 
remittances. The CAD narrowed to US$6.5 billion in FY24 from US$11.6 billion in FY23. The narrowing was driven 
by a fall in merchandise imports by 10.6 percent, the second consecutive year imports growth contracted. The fall 
in imports was driven in part by import suppression measures and a shortage of foreign currency in the banking 
system. This resulted in a sharp decline in imports of capital goods (21.9 percent decline in FY24) and consumer 
goods (12.8 percent decline). Merchandise exports also declined by 5.9 percent, driven by a decline in ready-made 
garments (RMG) exports by 5.4 percent. The actual decline in exports became evident after the data revision in

June 2024 (see Box 2). Despite the depreciation of the taka, exports were negatively affected by rising raw material 
costs, supply chain disruptions from the Middle East crisis8, and a slowdown in global demand. A robust increase 
in remittances (up 10.7 percent in FY24) also bolstered the current account. The increase in remittances was 
driven by the depreciation of taka, incentives given by the government, and additional incentives provided by 
banks to encourage remittance inflow through the formal channels, particularly in the second half of FY24.9

The balance of payments deficit improved. The considerable narrowing of the CAD helped the overall BoP deficit 
to decline to US$4.3 billion in FY24 from US$8.2 billion a year ago, despite the financial account surplus also 
declining. A major revision in the BoP data by BB turned the current account surplus into a deficit and the financial 
account deficit into a surplus for FY23 and FY24 (see Box 2). The decline in the financial account surplus in FY24 
was driven by a sharp decline in net trade credit resulting from weak imports growth. However, disbursement of 
medium to long-term loans increased, supported by the IMF’s third tranche of disbursement and budget support 
(development policy) financing by the World Bank and other development partners towards the end of FY24. 
Other short-term lending contracted because of higher US interest rates and deteriorating private sector 
creditworthiness. Similar to FY23, net errors and omissions continued to represent an unusually large share of the 
BoP deficit (67.4 percent).

BB adopted a crawling peg exchange rate system on 
May 8, 2024 which has helped narrow the gap 
between the formal exchange rate and the informal 
(kerb) rate. Under the previous multiple exchange rate 
system, the interbank exchange rate was insufficiently 
flexible to clear the FX market, resulting in dollar 
illiquidity in domestic banks. On the back of continued 
distortion in the FX market, BB decided to adopt a 
crawling peg exchange rate system in May 2024, with 
the mid-point exchange rate set at 117 BDT/US$, which 
was a 6.3 percent depreciation of the currency. A 
trading band of +/-1 percent was created around the 
midpoint. The band was widened to 2.5 percent on August 21, 2024 to enhance the flexibility of the exchange rate 
resulting in further depreciation of the currency to 120 BDT/US$ and a narrowing of the gap between the formal 
and informal exchange rates to approximately 1.7 percent.

FX reserves continued to remain under pressure, despite budget support from the development partners and 
strong remittance inflows. BB continued to intervene in the FX market throughout FY24 (albeit less than they did 
in FY23), selling US$12.8 billion of foreign reserves.10 Gross FX reserves declined by approximately US$ 3 billion in 
FY24 (from US$24.8 billion in June 2023 to US$21.7 billion in June 2024). They fell to a 5-year low of US$18.3 
billion in May before stabilizing over the past five months. BB’s dollar-taka swap facility for commercial banks, 
which initially bolstered gross reserves, was discontinued on May 8, 2024. In June 2024, the release of the IMFs 
third tranche of disbursement under the ongoing program and budget support from the World Bank and other

development partners helped FX reserves to increase to US$21.8 billion. As a result, the quantitative performance 
criteria (QPC) on net international reserves of US$14.7 billion under the IMF program were met in the second 
review in June 2024. FX reserves declined to US$19.7 billion as of September 30 (approximately 3.2 months of 
prospective imports), as a result of a US$1.3 billion payment to the Asian Clearing Unit. Payment due to several 
energy suppliers continues to put pressure on the FX reserves.

crisis. According to the Office of Textiles and Apparel (OTEXA) under the US Department of Commerce, apparel 
imports by the USA from Bangladesh declined by 12.3 percent (y-o-y) during the January-May period of 2024. 
The gap between the exports shipments and exports receipts had grown significantly by over US$12 billion in 
FY23. The revisions to the data are expected to resolve the discrepancy between shipments and receipts.

Bangladesh’s revenue-to-GDP ratio remains one of 
the lowest in the world. Revenue collection is 
estimated to have increased to 8.5 percent of GDP 
percent in FY24 from 8.2 percent in FY23. Growth in 
trade-related taxes remained moderate due to the 
fall in imports. As in previous years, the National 
Board for Revenue (NBR) set an ambitious target of 
BDT 4300 billion for taxes in FY24 (22.0 percent 
higher than the provisional FY23 collection). 
However, revenue collections have persistently 
fallen short of budgeted targets in recent years 
(Figure 11). The annual average shortfall over FY18 
to FY22 was BDT 749 billion (2.4 percent of GDP). The 
main contributors to the shortfalls are VAT and 
supplementary duty collections.

The fiscal deficit is estimated to have declined marginally in FY24 as expenditure growth remained modest. 
Total expenditure as a share of GDP is estimated to have increased modestly by 0.2 percentage points to 13.0 
percent of GDP in FY24. Current expenditure as a share of GDP increased by 0.3 percentage points to 8.3 percent 
of GDP, and capital expenditure’s share declined incrementally to 4.2 percent of GDP. Capital expenditures were 
affected by restrictions on imports because of the foreign exchange shortages and reprioritization of projects.

Implementation of the ADP remained low in FY24. The FY24 ADP budget was BDT 2.7 trillion (US$23.7 billion), 
with BDT 1.69 trillion (US$15.4 billion) of domestic financing and BDT 940.0 billion (US$8.5 billion) of external 
financing. The implementation rate was 80.9 percent in FY24 compared to 85.2 percent in FY23. The slowdown 
can be attributed to the lack of US dollars for imports, capacity constraints within ministries on implementation, 
and a lack of coordination within government ministries and agencies. The budget for the ADP was increased 
modestly by 8.1 percent for FY25. However, the interim government is likely to revise the budget estimate 
downwards.

Public expenditure and fiscal policy will play a key role in supporting Bangladesh’s growth objectives. In the 
near-term, fiscal policy will need to support monetary policy tightening to help contain inflationary pressure 
while protecting vulnerable groups. Over the medium-term, increased public spending is needed to improve 
human capital and infrastructure outcomes. A forthcoming Public Finance Review analyzes fiscal data to 
inform policy recommendations, several of which are summarized below.

Budget execution remains weak and ambitious 
targets have not been met, undermining budget 
credibility. Budgets have targeted a significant 
increase in public expenditure over the past decade. 
However, the gap between original budget targets 
and actual expenditure has widened since FY11 
(Figure 12). The execution gap grew from 0.4 percent 
of GDP in FY11 to 2.2 percent of GDP in FY22. In FY23, 
15.4 percent of the total budget was not executed. 
Energy and fertilizer subsidies have risen, while 
strategic investments in health and education have 
lagged. Addressing these implementation gaps will 
require reforms to strengthen revenue mobilization and efficiently execute expenditure programs.

Key recommendations - domestic revenue generation

• 
Shift from trade-based taxes to consumption and income taxes in preparation for LDC graduation, 
requiring fundamental tax reforms, inter-agency cooperation, and stakeholder consultation.

• 
Separate tax policy from tax administration, setting specific revenue targets for each tax type. Establish 
a unit within the MoF to coordinate reforms and manage the transition to income and consumption 
taxes.

• 
Implement the 2023 National Tariff Policy by rationalizing tariffs, reducing para-tariffs in phases, and 
adopting uniform tariff rates for similar goods.

• 
Amend the VAT to a single standard rate with limited exemptions. Introduce a modern electronic VAT 
system to increase revenues and improve compliance.

• 
Strengthen direct taxation through enhanced income tax enforcement, wealth and capital gains taxes, 
and updated property tax rates based on market valuations. Avoid tax amnesties to sustain compliance.

• 
Identify and rationalize tax expenditures, reviewing and quantifying each major tax type. Reduce SROs 
and ad-hoc tax exemptions for consistent policy.

• 
Automate tax administration, integrating data between income tax, VAT, and customs. Use third-party 
data to strengthen compliance and build NBR staff capacity for better implementation.

Key recommendations – restoring budget credibility and increasing efficiency

• 
Strengthen fiscal transparency and budget credibility by setting realistic budget targets and integrating 
investment programs into the budget framework. Prioritize green and climate-resilient objectives in 
economic planning and align them with the budget process. Adjust the chart of accounts to properly 
classify key investments and conduct annual expenditure reviews.

• 
Improve public sector staffing and compensation by adopting a systematic approach to salary 
adjustments and addressing gender gaps in the labor force. Rationalize unfilled vacancies, linking 
staffing to budget availability.

• 
Enhance expenditure efficiency by aligning National Savings Certificate interest payments with market 
rates and controlling subsidy spending. Implement market-based tariffs in the power sector and 
transition fertilizer subsidies to a voucher-based program. Replace emergency procurement with 
competitive bidding to reduce generation costs.

• 
Plan for future government revenues by increasing funding for health, education, and social protection 
programs, particularly for vulnerable children and the urban poor. Improve social protection through 
better use of the national household database and G2P payment systems. Review operations and 
maintenance budgets to support recent infrastructure investments.

Real GDP growth is projected to decelerate to 4.0 percent in FY25 but could range between 3.2 and 5.2 percent. 
The wide range reflects the uncertainty on the outlook regarding the impact of the protests and political turmoil 
at the beginning of the fiscal year. The slowdown in growth will be driven by subdued investment and industrial 
sector activities. Recent floods could also weigh on agriculture growth. Growth is expected to accelerate to 5.5 
percent in FY26 and revert to its long-term trend thereafter. Inflation is likely to remain elevated in the near-term 
and gradually subside in the medium-term if import prices stabilize and prudent monetary and fiscal policies are 
maintained. Pressure on the external sector is expected to persist in FY25, but the pressure can ease in the latter 
part of the FY if global conditions are favorable and exchange rate flexibility remains. The fiscal deficit is expected 
to remain within the government's target of 4.3 percent of GDP in FY25, with fiscal space for capital expenditure 
increasing only gradually. However, there are significant downside risks to this outlook. Persistent inflationary 
pressures, weak demand in Bangladesh's major export markets, and intensifying financial sector vulnerabilities 
could weigh on growth.

The global economic outlook has improved but remains subdued. Global growth is projected to remain subdued 
at 2.7 percent in 2025-26 after 2.6 percent growth in 2024. Global growth outlook remains below long-term 
trends, as both advanced and emerging market economies are expected to grow at a slower pace than in the 
decade preceding the COVID-19 pandemic. Several downside risks to the outlook persist. Escalating geopolitical 
tensions, notably the conflict in the Middle East and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and further trade fragmentation 
could lead to a surge in global commodity prices and supply chain disruptions. Elevated core inflation in advanced 
economies could hinder monetary easing and prolong tight financial conditions. Slower than expected growth in 
China could adversely impact global economic activity.

Real GDP growth in Bangladesh is expected to moderate in FY25 before accelerating in FY26. Real GDP growth 
is projected to decline to 4.0 percent in FY25 but could range between 3.2 and 5.2 percent. The wide range of the 
projection reflects the significant uncertainties on the outlook. On the demand side, the deceleration in growth 
will be driven by a slowdown in private consumption, investment, and exports, amid high inflationary pressures, 
tight financing conditions, and supply disruptions in FY25. On the supply side, these uncertainties are expected to 
keep industrial growth subdued in the short-term. Recent floods are expected to moderate agriculture growth. 
Growth is expected to rise gradually over the medium-term, benefiting from critical financial sector reforms, 
increased revenue mobilization, improved business climate, and expanded trade. These reforms will help 
Bangladesh to prepare for LDC graduation in 2026, after which the country will gradually have reduced access to 
concessional financing and preferential export market access. However, there are significant downside risks, 
including increased political instability and prolonged impact of the protests and political turmoil, and the 
potential insolvency of some banks that would worsen an already weak financial sector.

Inflation is projected to decline marginally but remain elevated in FY25. Headline inflation is expected to 
moderate from 9.7 percent in FY24 to 9.0 percent in FY25. High food and import prices exacerbated by supply 
disruptions are expected to keep headline inflation elevated during the forecast period. The inflation trajectory 
will also depend on the effective transmission of the central bank’s monetary policy and the government’s fiscal 
policy stance. The adoption of the crawling peg will help stabilize the exchange rate and foreign exchange reserves. 
Given that Bangladesh is an oil importer, significant downside risks stem from higher than anticipated global 
energy prices, driven by geopolitical tensions.

BB is expected to maintain a tight monetary policy stance in the near term to curb inflationary pressures. BB 
will continue to hike the policy rate to anchor inflationary expectations and undertake steps to improve the 
transmission of monetary policy. The policy rate was raised by 100 basis points in August-September 2024 to 9.5 
percent (cumulatively by 425 basis points since May 2022). Measures introduced by BB in FY24, including the 
introduction of the crawling peg exchange rate system and the removal of the cap on bank lending rates, will help 
improve transmission and result in a slow but sustained moderation in inflation as monetary tightening is expected 
to impact the real economy with a lag. However, the financial sector remains vulnerable to high NPLs, which 
impedes effective interbank financial intermediation.

The fiscal deficit is projected to narrow marginally to 4.3 percent of GDP in FY25. Expenditure growth constrained 
by subdued revenue mobilization will keep the fiscal deficit below 5 percent in the near term. Capital expenditure 
is expected to be muted due to the government’s decision to prioritize only essential projects for FY25. Over the 
medium-term, strengthening revenue performance will be crucial to expand investments in infrastructure and 
human capital. Debt as a share of GDP is expected to remain sustainable with external debt accounting for only 
17.4 percent of GDP.

The current account deficit will narrow in FY25-26, driven by strong inflows of workers’ remittances from 
abroad. Remittances are projected to stay robust in FY25, supported by the adoption of the crawling peg exchange 
rate regime. This will help narrow the current account deficit in FY25 and FY26. Exports growth is expected to 
remain moderate, in the face of high input costs, weak global demand, and manufacturing sector uncertainties. 
There are reportedly significant external payments due related to the imports of energy and fertilizer.

Downside risks have increased, and significant uncertainties remain. Uncertainties arise from several factors. 
First, safety and security concerns persist and are likely to remain until the police force is fully operational. This 
can have an impact on the recovery of economic activities. Although the interim government is prioritizing law 
and order, restoring the police's full strength may take time due to the widespread destruction of police 
infrastructure. Second, the timing of the next election is uncertain. Disagreements between political parties and 
the interim government over the election date could heighten political tensions in the future. Financial sector 
reforms are underway, but the sector remains quite vulnerable to shocks. Unforeseen natural disasters have the 
potential to disrupt food production and escalate food inflation, thus keeping inflation higher than projected in 
the medium term.

The interim government has a historical opportunity to undertake major reforms that will bolster economic and 
institutional resilience. Bangladesh faces several multifaceted challenges in the short and medium-term. Ensuring 
macroeconomic stability is critical given the elevated inflation and the potential for prolonged disruptions to 
economic activity from the political transition.

Governance is an underlying theme that cuts across all the critical reforms. Improving governance in the public 
sector and the corporate sector is crucial for restoring trust in public institutions and protecting consumers. This 
will require reforms to enhance transparency and accountability and reduce corruption. Strengthening public 
sector capacity in domestic revenue management, public investment, procurement, financial management, and 
data systems will be critical for a more open, effective, responsive, and citizen-centric public sector.

Bangladesh needs to raise more public revenue to adequately meet its development financing needs. The 
current tax-to-GDP ratio of 7.4 percent (FY24) is woefully insufficient to meet the country’s critical development 
financing needs. This low collection significantly constrains the government’s capacity to finance critical public 
investments in energy and infrastructure, human capital development, and social sectors. Priority reforms include 
the separation of tax policymaking and administration, rationalization of tax expenditures, moving to a uniform 
VAT rate, and reducing tariffs and non-tariff barriers in line with the National Tariff Policy.

Reforming the financial sector is urgently needed to ensure financial stability and bolster private sector 
investment. It is critical to strengthen the enforcement of banking regulations, including the PCA framework for 
weak and stressed banks, to prevent further deterioration of the banks’ balance sheets. In addition to the 
management of NPLs, stressed banks need to be restructured. State-owned banks require reforms to strengthen 
their corporate governance and prudential oversight by BB.

Bangladesh needs to create more jobs. Bangladesh requires a comprehensive and coordinated policy approach 
that addresses the demand and supply constraints for jobs. The business climate needs to be strengthened to 
promote private investments and FDI, which will create more jobs. The World Bank’s B-Ready report 202411 
indicates that Bangladesh will need to improve business insolvency, dispute resolution, and market competition. 
To address supply constraints, improvements in education quality and reforming technical training systems are 
major priorities, to ensure that job seekers develop the skills demanded by employers. The Special Focus section 
on jobs provides greater details.

The recent student-led popular protests started with a demand to withdraw the quota system in public sector jobs, 
but the protests reflected widespread dissatisfaction with an economy that was perceived to be generating 
insufficient employment opportunities. Bangladesh’s economic progress over the last decade did not translate into 
a sufficient number of urban jobs in industry. As a result, Bangladesh is at risk of missing out on a historical 
opportunity to take advantage of demographic dividends.

Most firms in Bangladesh are small and encounter various obstacles to growth and hence job creation. The 
informal sector continues to dominate the economy, creating 84.9 percent of total employment. Job creation in 
large industries has stagnated. Frontier13 readymade garments firms generate nearly half of the country’s total 
firm revenues but provide just 1 out of every 12 formal private sector jobs. FDI remains low, and the business 
environment has significant shortcomings, including challenges in access to finance and energy, high costs of doing 
business such as time dealing with regulators and trade and customs regulations, and cumbersome customs and 
trade regulations.

There is an excess supply of labor compared to demand particularly for the more educated and skilled workforce. 
Tertiary educated unemployed youth as a share of total unemployed increased significantly to 27.8 percent, with 
many young people struggling to find jobs that align with their skills and educational qualifications. There is a 
growing mismatch between the competencies of graduates and the skills and knowledge demanded by employers.

Moving forward, Bangladesh requires a comprehensive and coordinated policy approach that addresses both the 
demand and supply constraints for jobs. To address demand constraints, it is critical to strengthen the business 
environment to attract new firms, increase foreign investment, and promote export diversification. The World 
Bank’s 2024 B-Ready report14 indicate that Bangladesh will need to improve business insolvency, dispute 
resolution, and market competition. A strong public-private sector dialogue is needed to identify the key business 
climate constraints. To address supply constraints, improvements in education quality and reforming technical

training systems are major priorities. It is essential to collaborate with skills development providers and the private 
sector to ensure that job seekers develop the skills demanded by employers.

Bangladesh has sustained growth over decades, but this has not been accompanied by commensurate creation 
of industry and services jobs. From 2016 to 2022, the industry and service sectors grew by 9.0 percent and 5.9 
percent on average every year, respectively. However, the share of employment in the industry and services 
sectors declined by 3.4 and 1.4 percentage points, reaching 17 percent and 37.6 percent, respectively (Figure 14). 
The manufacturing sector grew annually by 9.1 percent between 2016 and 2022, but jobs in this sector declined 
by 9.6 percent. In 2022, the manufacturing sector employed 11.3 percent of the total employed population, down 
from 14.4 percent in 2016. The robust growth and low job creation in the manufacturing sector have resulted in 
productivity gains. Jobs in the construction sector have remained stable, consistently providing around 5.5 
percent of employment over the last decade. The share of employment in key service sectors, such as wholesale 
and retail trade, and transportation, has also declined. This decline can be partially attributed to the COVID-19 
pandemic, which particularly impacted these sectors.

In recent years, most new jobs have been created in the agricultural sector, resulting in a slow-down of 
structural transformation. Typically, as countries develop, there is a shift away from agriculture, with a 
corresponding decline in the sector's share of employment. The structural transition from agriculture to 
manufacturing and services has been sustained since 2000, but this has significantly reversed in recent years as 
excess labor has been absorbed in the agriculture sector. Since 2016, the share of employment in agriculture has 
increased by 4.9 percentage points, reaching 45.4 percent in 2022, despite a decline in agriculture's share in GDP 
during the same period (Figure 14).

Since 2016, rural areas drove job growth while urban areas outside Dhaka have stagnated. Rural employment 
creation tripled from 0.4 million annually between 2010-2016 to 1.4 million between 2016-2022, largely due to 
increased female labor participation15. In contrast, urban areas outside Dhaka experienced a sharp decline in 
employment growth, with only about 500,000 new urban jobs created between 2016-2022, compared to 4.6 
million from 2010-2016 (Figure 16A). Notably, 80 percent of these new urban jobs were concentrated in Dhaka, 
while three divisions (Chittagong, Rajshahi, and Sylhet) reported net employment losses. This trend represents a 
slowdown of the expected structural transformation, with agriculture dominating job creation instead of 
manufacturing and industry. The employment landscape is further characterized by a significant portion of the 
workforce remaining in low-paying, informal agricultural jobs, increasing unemployment among university-
educated youth, and weak female labor force participation, especially in urban areas.

Slower growth in urban employment was accompanied by declining labor participation across all divisions and 
particularly among urban women. Since 2016, labor participation rates declined by 4.8 percentage points, with 
particularly sharp declines in Rajshahi (14.1 percentage points) and Chittagong (9.3 percentage points). This 
downturn was pronounced among urban women, whose labor participation fell by 7.7 percentage points – more 
than three times the decline observed among men (Figure 16, Panel B). This decline is driven by a combination of 
factors, including a slowdown in job creation in the RMG sector. The impact has been particularly severe for young, 
educated women, whose participation rate fell by 11 percentage points between 2016 and 2022. Some young 
women have shifted toward investing in education, and others have become inactive, been discouraged by the 
lack of employment opportunities and poor working conditions.

Rural female labor force participation has been increasing, primarily driven by younger, educated women 
entering agricultural work. Most of these jobs are characterized by low pay and poor working conditions, and 
female employment remains heavily concentrated in elementary occupations16, such as crop production. The shift 
toward agricultural work is primarily driven by the lack of job opportunities in other sectors, combined with social 
norms restricting women’s mobility and employment options outside their homes even as they become more 
educated. Limited access to financial resources and assets, such as land, further constrain rural women’s ability 
to diversify their income sources, leaving them relying on low-quality agricultural employment. In contrast, men 
in rural areas are increasingly transitioning to relatively skilled positions in the services sector.

The growth in employment in Bangladesh has 
largely been driven by informal jobs18. A notable 
decline in the contribution of the industry and 
service sectors suggests an overall deterioration of 
job quality. Currently, an overwhelming 84.9 
percent of jobs are in the informal sector, 
reflecting only a marginal reduction in informality 
over the past 12 years, down from 87.5 percent in 
2010. This trend is even more pronounced for 
women, with informality rates at 96.6 percent. 
Bangladesh lags behind other lower-middle-
income countries, where informal employment 
accounts for approximately 55 percent of the 
workforce (World Bank, 2018a). According to the 
Bangladesh Standard Classification of Occupations (BSCO), the largest segment of the workforce is classified under 
the category "skilled agriculture, forestry, and fisheries," comprising 43.4 percent of total employment. 
Employment in this category saw some of the highest growth rates between 2016 and 2022, indicating that any 
job creation gains during this period were predominantly in informal positions. In contrast, managers and 
professionals represent less than 10 percent of the overall workforce, and their numbers have declined slightly 
since 2016. About three-quarter of the jobs are in the rural area.

Despite improvements in recent years, workers in the informal sector encounter numerous challenges related 
to their employment conditions. Currently, approximately 42.8 percent of the employed population lacks written 
contracts, relying predominantly on verbal agreements. This marks an improvement from 2016, when 69.4 
percent had only oral contracts. The situation is particularly concerning for women, with over 50 percent lacking 
any written agreements. Among paid employees, only 14 percent benefit from employer contributions to a 
pension scheme or retirement fund. Only 63.3 percent of paid employees aged 30 to 64 have access to paid sick 
leave, although this is an improvement from 30.3 percent in 2016. Around one-third of workers are exposed to 
extreme temperatures, and another third encounter hazardous conditions such as dust, fumes, noise, or 
vibrations. Alarmingly, 62.1 percent of the workforce reported experiencing at least one occupational injury in the 
past 12 months.

Wages remain exceedingly low. Overall, real wage 
declined by 2.6 percent on average across all 
categories, indicating a significant deterioration in the 
standard of living, particularly for low-income groups. 
The average hourly wage in Bangladesh remains lower 
than the lower-middle-income countries, South Asia, 
and structural peer countries20 (Figure 20).

Productivity remains low, leading to low wages. 
Between 
2000-2005 
and 
2012-2016, 
capital's 
contribution to GDP relative to labor increased, 
indicating a shift towards a more capital-intensive 
economy. Labor productivity in Bangladesh was the 
lowest compared with its peers21 during the period 
2010-2019. The average output per worker in Bangladesh in 2019 was just 72 percent of that of workers in 
India, half those in Indonesia, one-third of those in Sri Lanka, and only one-fifth of those in China. Despite 
some improvement over time, labor productivity remained relatively low compared to these peer countries.

Emigration remains a critical source of employment

Emigration has been a significant source of employment for many Bangladeshis. Between FY16 and FY24, an 
average of 800,000 workers migrated abroad each year, primarily to Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries. 
Beyond the GCC, Malaysia and Singapore emerged as key destinations for Bangladeshi migrants. The pandemic

significantly disrupted this trend, leading to a substantial number of migrants returning home. However, the 
outflow of workers rebounded strongly in FY23 and FY24. These migrants played a crucial role in bolstering 
Bangladesh's economy through remittances. Recently, migration to Malaysia, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, 
and Saudi Arabia has faced challenges due to visa restrictions and increased hiring fees in those countries.

Migrating can incur substantial costs, but remittances remain a major source of income for the households of 
the migrants. Remittances sent by the migrants support their families in Bangladesh and play an important role 
in the growth of private consumption. Between FY16 and FY24, formal remittance inflow grew at an average 
annual rate of 6.1 percent. A large fraction of the remittances also come through informal channels. However, the 
high cost of migration can force many migrants to deplete their life savings or take on significant loans to finance 
their journeys. According to the Labor Force Survey (LFS) 2022, the average recruitment cost for migration in 2022 
was BDT 381.9 thousand, with considerable variations depending on the destination. Once migrants arrive in their 
destination countries, it typically takes about 14.6 months for them to recover these expenses. The high costs can 
lead to severe indebtedness. A significant portion of these expenses—estimated at around three-quarters—arises 
from intermediation services, primarily paid to private agencies, including visa fees.

Informal firms encounter various challenges in their efforts to grow and transition to the formal sector

Informal enterprises encounter significant challenges that hinder their growth and the creation of jobs 22. 
In Bangladesh, the employment landscape is dominated by microenterprises, 23 mostly small retail operations 
run by families. According to the 2022 Informal Enterprise Survey conducted by the World Bank24, a significant 
majority of informal businesses—55 percent in Dhaka and 51 percent in Chattogram—are owned by single 
households (Figure 21). The majority of these informal businesses are engaged in retail sales (Figure 22). 
These informal firms struggle to transition to the formal sector. The lack of formal registration leads to 
regulatory obstacles, and limited access to credit restricts investment opportunities, leaving many businesses

relying on personal funds or informal loans at high interest rates. A significant majority of businesses cited 
the time, fees, and paperwork involved in registration as burdensome and time-consuming. Taxes are seen 
as a significant barrier, and many businesses are concerned about regulatory scrutiny and the potential for

having to pay bribes. Additionally, these firms are less resilient to economic downturns due to inadequate 
buffers such as insurance, and many workers lack the skills necessary to enhance productivity. They often 
struggle to compete with larger, formally registered businesses that benefit from economies of scale and 
better marketing. Compounding these issues, informal firms face difficulties accessing essential 
infrastructure, and there is a notable lack of awareness about formal registration processes. Many firms do 
not see the benefit of becoming formal and even make informal payments to remain unregistered.

As a result, formal firm entry in Bangladesh is low. The 
limited number of new firm entrants in Bangladesh's 
formal private sector suggests significant entry barriers, 
hindering efficient resource allocation and the creation 
of productive jobs. In 2018, Bangladesh registered 
approximately 4,500 new limited liability companies 
(LLCs), down from 8,100 in 2016, resulting in only 0.04 
LLCs per 1,000 working-age people, one of the lowest 
rates among peers (Figure 23).

In addition to low firm entry, most firms in Bangladesh 
fail to grow or exit, contributing to a lack of dynamism 
in the formal enterprise sector. The stagnation in 
Bangladesh's microenterprise sector can be partially 
attributed to the role these businesses play as a means 
of livelihood in the absence of quality employment 
opportunities. In such a scenario, few microenterprises 
are geared toward growth, and exiting the market is 
rarely an option. However, this lack of dynamism is also apparent among enterprises with 10 or more employees.

Large and high-performance firms are also not generating enough jobs.

Large manufacturing firms in Bangladesh are concentrated in the RMG industry, and the job creation in this 
sector has stagnated. Within the formal sector, the RMG sector has a significant presence in both the frontier and 
non-frontier firms.25 RMG frontier firms generate nearly half of the country’s total firm revenues but provide just 
1 out of every 12 formal private sector jobs. Nevertheless, the RMG sector has been a major driver of job creation, 
particularly for women. However, total employment in the RMG sector rose by a modest 4.4 percent between 
2016 and 2022, and female employment in the sector declined sharply by 11.8 percent. The sector is experiencing 
challenges from global price competition, supply chain consolidation, and rising wage demands, which hinder its 
job creation capacity.

Frontier firms contribute around 75 percent of total 
sales26 and offer higher wages, but they account for 
only 15 percent of formal employment. Frontier firms 
outperform competitors on innovation, research and 
development (R&D) investment, and adoption of 
foreign technologies27. Frontier firms offer higher 
wages and employ a larger proportion of skilled 
workers. Wages in these firms are 42 percent higher 
compared to non-frontier firms of similar size and age 
and operating in the same state and sector. However, 
these firms account for only 15 percent of formal 
employment. Frontier firms are unlikely to generate 
many jobs due to their capital-intensive nature and 
dependence on a smaller number of highly skilled labor. From 2013 to 2022, capital intensity among garment 
firms has risen by 70 percent, while it increased by 166 percent in the broader manufacturing sector. This 
significant increase in the capital-labor ratio in both sectors has been primarily driven by frontier firms. Within 
manufacturing, most job creation occurs in younger, non-frontier firms that started operating in the past 20 years.

The creation of productive jobs depends on firms’ ability to invest in productive new technologies, areas where 
Bangladeshi firms lag. Compared to peers like Indonesia, the Philippines, and Vietnam, where around 10 percent 
of firms license a technology from a foreign firm, the share is only 3 percent for Bangladesh. FDI, a key channel for 
introducing advanced and more productive technologies, remains limited with its share stagnating around 1 
percent of GDP, well below the average for lower-middle-income countries and regional peers. In 2022, 
Bangladesh had a relatively low percentage of firms with foreign ownership compared to other countries such as 
India, Thailand, Vietnam, China, Indonesia, and Cambodia (Figure 25). Relatively low levels of foreign investment 
limit opportunities for technology transfer and innovation. The percentage of firms that introduced new products 
have also declined sharply and remained low compared to peer countries (Figure 26). Most firms use rudimentary 
information technologies for business processes, although some firms are at an advanced technological level. 
For example, 47 percent of firms still use handwritten processes for business management, and 72 percent 
practice manual quality inspections (World Bank, 2021). Firms have started using digital technologies for sales 
and payments, but the use of cash and traditional sales methods are still predominant.

The business environment is not supportive of firm entry and growth 
 
Business regulations are burdensome and time-consuming, and starting a business is expensive. The number of 
days required to obtain business licenses and for compliance are higher than in regional peers (Figure 27). For 
example, securing construction permits or import licenses takes an average of 49 days, nearly double the time 
required in China or India (Galal, et. al., 2024). Public procurement contracts are frequently awarded non-
competitively. Starting a business involves significant costs, posing challenges for new firms. Stakeholder 
consultations estimate the cost of starting a business at around US$10,000. This expense poses a challenge, 
particularly for new companies. The total expense covers registration with the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies 
and Firms (RJSC), trade licenses, and annual audit fees, regardless of firm size. For over 50 percent of firms under 
six years old, these startup costs exceed 10 percent of their annual revenues, making market entry difficult for 
new companies. Based on the recent B-Ready report by the World Bank, Bangladesh scores lowest in business 
insolvency, dispute resolution, and market competition. Within these areas, there are no digital services 
regarding liquidation and reorganization proceedings, the economy lags in the organizational structure of 
courts, and lacks digitalization of intellectual property services.

The challenges faced by formal sector firms vary based on the firm size. Small businesses (5-19 employees) 
primarily struggle with access to finance, unreliable electricity supply, and corruption. Medium-sized firms 
(20-99 employees) face similar issues, along with competition from unregistered informal businesses. Large 
companies (100+ employees) mainly contend with electricity disruptions, corruption-induced inefficiencies, 
and bureaucratic hurdles in customs and trade regulations, which impact their international competitiveness. 
Access to finance is particularly critical for small firms' growth, while electricity issues and corruption affect 
businesses across all size categories, increasing operational costs and hindering efficiency.

Urban congestion and poor infrastructure in secondary cities are creating challenges for firms. Greater Dhaka 
alone generates one-fifth of the country’s GDP and almost half of its formal employment and creates over 30 
percent of its formal manufacturing jobs (World Bank, 2022). As a result of poor urban planning and governance, 
Dhaka's rapid urbanization has led to significant congestion costs, including high housing and transport costs, 
which are putting pressure on wages and hindering firm growth. Managing urban congestion through improved 
infrastructure and urban planning is critical to sustaining economic growth in major cities. Secondary cities in 
Bangladesh lack the infrastructure and services needed to attract investment and become alternative centers for 
job creation. For the expected surge in urban population to generate economic growth and lift Bangladesh to high-
income country status, cities outside of Dhaka will have to absorb more than 50 million people, provide them with 
gainful employment, and generate productivity growth. Newer urban industrial growth has been located mostly 
in areas around Dhaka as well as along the Dhaka-Chittagong corridor and around Chittagong. They as well as 
centers of other regions need to be supported with more efficient planning and provision of infrastructure and 
services.

A protective trade regime is creating barriers to export diversification. The current export basket is as heavily 
dependent on RMGs (at 83 percent of total exports in 2020) as it has been over the past two decades. The lack of 
export diversification can be at least partly attributed to the country’s protective trade regime. The average tariff 
rate on intermediate goods in Bangladesh is 18.8 percent, which is more than double the rate in China (7.4 
percent) and almost double the rate in Thailand and Vietnam (9.6 percent). Average tariffs, or nominal protection 
rate, more than double (29 percent) if para-tariffs are included, making Bangladesh an outlier among countries 
with a similar income level. With trade competitiveness based on low wages and trade preferences eroding, the 
overreliance on RMG exports and the perpetuation of a protective tariff regime challenge the sustainability of 
Bangladesh’s growth model (World Bank, 2022).

Youth unemployment in Bangladesh has become a pressing issue. The recent uprising by the students initially 
started with a demand to withdraw the quota system in public sector jobs but reflected the wider issue of 
unemployment among the youth. Government jobs can accommodate only a little more than 5 percent of the 
total workforce. The private sector is not creating enough jobs. Tertiary educated unemployed youth as a share 
of the total unemployed rose significantly from 9.7 percent in 2013 to 27.8 percent in 2022 (Figure 28).

Additionally, many young people face challenges in pursuing entrepreneurship. In many countries, policies 
supporting entrepreneurship and start-ups play a critical role in creating employment for youth. However, it is 
difficult in Bangladesh due to a lack of resources, financing, and mentorship (Azad, 2022; Hossain, 2006). Limited 
access to financing due to limited collateral and gender discrimination by banks is the main constraint female 
entrepreneurs face in expanding their business and exporting products (Livani and Solotaroff, 2019; ADB 2010).

More than one-fifth of the youth population in 
Bangladesh is not engaged in education, employment, 
or training (NEET). Although the youth NEET rate has 
declined since 2016, it remains elevated at 22 percent. 
While the gender composition of the NEET youth 
population is changing, women still constitute the 
majority at 65 percent, suggesting their engagement in 
household chores and the presence of institutional 
barriers limit female participation in the labor market. 
The rural-urban composition of the NEET youth 
population has also shifted significantly, with 52.4 
percent of NEET youth located in urban areas in 2022, 
up from 30.5 percent in 2016. The availability of vocational training for these NEET youth remains insufficient, as 
98.5 percent of the working-age population has not received any vocational training, and the types of training 
provided are limited, with about one-third focused on computer skills.

There is a mismatch between the supply and demand of skills possessed by the youth

The excessive supply of labor compared to 
demand seems to be more pronounced for the 
more 
educated 
skilled 
workforce. 
Labor 
underutilization encompasses various forms of 
employment 
inadequacies, 
including 
unemployment, underemployment (time-related 
unemployment)28, and potential labor force (those 
who are not actively seeking work but are available 
for employment). A high labor underutilization rate 
suggests that there are more people willing and 
able to work than there are suitable job 
opportunities available, indicating a mismatch 
between labor demand and supply. The data shows 
that the labor underutilization rate increases with the level of education (Figure 32) in Bangladesh.

Numerous studies indicate a growing mismatch between the competencies of graduates and the demands of 
the job market. There is a lack of skills and knowledge demanded by employers, as the education system often 
fails to provide industry-relevant training (Ehsan, 2021; Rahman, Farooq, & Mohamad, 2021). Employers identify 
three higher-order cognitive and soft skills as particularly crucial for today’s work environment: (a) problem-
solving and independent thinking, (b) work attitude, and (c) positive personality traits (World Bank, 2019a). 
Unfortunately, many recent graduates fall short in these areas. Research focused on business graduates in 
Bangladesh reveals significant gaps in essential employability skills. Key deficiencies include inadequate teamwork 
abilities, poor communication and interpersonal skills, an inability to learn and adapt to new environments, a lack 
of negotiation skills, and insufficient organizational skills (Milon et.al, 2021). In the banking sector—a major source 
of formal private sector jobs—employers in Bangladesh report challenges in finding graduates who can effectively

solve problems in group settings, communicate well both orally and in writing, provide quick solutions to 
challenges, and maintain positive relationships with colleagues (Chowdhury, 2020). Moreover, there is a notable 
discrepancy between the skills employers prioritize in candidates and the perceptions held by job seekers in 
Bangladesh. For instance, employers consider writing proficiency critical in their evaluation processes, but many 
candidates underestimate its importance (CPD, 2024).

Many young individuals express dissatisfaction with their jobs, and labor underutilization is notably high among 
the tertiary-educated workforce, reaching 12.8 percent. A recent survey by the Center for Policy Dialogue (CPD) 
highlights a disconnect between employees’ expectations and the realities of employment benefits, organizational 
culture, salary scales, required attributes, and working hours. In private enterprises in Bangladesh, workers feel 
they are often underpaid and overworked, with compensation structures failing to meet the aspirations of 
ambitious job seekers. Furthermore, young professionals feel that entry-level wages are too low to support the 
start of their careers. In the CPD survey, 82 percent indicated they were actively seeking other employment 
opportunities (CPD, 2024).

Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) education in Bangladesh is failing to equip students 
with the skills necessary for appropriate employment. Many young individuals prefer pursuing graduate and 
postgraduate academic degrees from universities and tertiary colleges over technical education from polytechnic 
institutions (academic track over technical track). The limited number of technical institutions does not produce 
enough skilled workers relevant to market needs (Rahman et al, 2021). Approximately 80 percent of employers 
of polytechnic graduates in Bangladesh indicate that problem-solving skills are a critical skill that needs 
improvement in training (World Bank, 2019a). Graduates from TVET institutions in Bangladesh face significant 
barriers in the job market, primarily due to a mismatch between their skills and job demands (Alam et al. (2024)). 
Notably, only 9.5 percent believe they possess high employability skills.

Tackling the challenges related to the jobs market in Bangladesh requires a comprehensive and coordinated 
policy approach. The policies can be organized using the 3Ps framework– production, people, and places.29 
Production policies should address labor demand constraints by removing barriers to private sector growth 
and productivity. People policies should target labor supply constraints by investing in skills and human 
capital. Finally, Places policies should address labor market frictions and limited market access that hinder 
efficient labor reallocation. These policy pillars need to be supported by sound fiscal, monetary, and financial 
sector policies to ensure macroeconomic stability, without which sustained private sector growth is not 
possible. It is essential to examine short-term policy actions that address the immediate challenges facing 
the current workforce. Equally important, however, is the consideration of medium- to long-term strategies 
aimed at fostering both the demand and supply of future workers.

Production Policies 
Enhancing the Investment Climate: Improved business environment and regulations 
would promote private sector development, attract FDI, and create better jobs. This 
includes improving the investment climate, strengthening regulatory bodies,

enhancing financial sector governance, promoting competition, and adopting a more 
open trade policy.

Promote export diversification and attract foreign direct investment: Implementing 
policies that level the playing field for non-RMG sectors is crucial. This includes 
standardizing tax, expanding access to customs facilities and financing for all sectors, 
and removing trade policy distortions like para-tariffs and non-tariff barriers. 
Reducing the level of protection by rationalizing the tariff regime is an urgent and 
immediate priority to support export diversification. The National Tariff Policy outlines 
a framework for reducing tariff and non-tariff barriers. The government can 
immediately start implementing this policy, including by moving toward low and 
uniform tariffs and adopting a single rate for similar goods, irrespective of origin. The 
government could enhance export diversification and global value chain (GVC) 
participation by complementing tariff modernization with non-tariff barriers (NTB) 
liberalization, advancing trade facilitation and services reforms in strategic sectors, 
and supporting firms' adoption of modern digital technologies

People policies 
Support for entrepreneurship. Given that over two-thirds of employment in 
Bangladesh is self-employment, it is crucial to support entrepreneurship. This can 
include online freelancing, gig work, tailoring, and food processing from home. 
Necessary interventions could involve expanding the current training program and 
seed capital. Bangladesh has successful programs that integrate training and 
microfinance in these areas.

Job Search and placement assistance: The government can expand active labor 
market policies that help individuals find employment, including job placement 
services, career counseling, and job matching.

Skills development through industry-academia collaboration: It is essential to 
develop curricula and programs in partnership with industry to ensure they meet 
current market needs. Bangladesh has made significant investments in skills 
development systems, but it is critical to strengthen the alignment of these systems 
with employer needs.

Quality Education: Investing in education is vital, not just in terms of coverage but 
also in the quality of education from the primary level through to university 
(foundational skills needed for lifelong learning). 
 
Skilled Workforce: In a globalized economy, the private sector's growth is contingent 
on access to a skilled workforce. Expanding technical and vocational training, 
particularly digital skills, and improving their quality is a priority.

Laws and regulations: An updated labor law can help address the issues related to 
workplace harassment, child labor, and freedom of association at the factory level. 
The new law could make sure it complies with the Generalised Scheme of Preferences 
Plus (GSP+) criteria for exports to the European Union (EU) after LDC graduation. 
Barriers to female labor force participation (FLFP) could be reduced by expanding 
access to childcare.

Support for emigration could focus on reducing emigration costs and promoting skills 
development that aligns with the needs of destination countries. This could enhance 
employment opportunities for more Bangladeshis abroad.

Bangladesh will need to enhance productivity growth and structural transformation of the 
largest cities, particularly Dhaka. Key policy recommendations include: (a) develop 
intracity as well as intercity transport infrastructure to transform Dhaka into a globally 
competitive metropolitan city; (b) reform urban housing policies (e.g. zoning) to increase 
housing supply elasticities; and (c) plan for combating the potential impacts of climate 
change in low-lying areas in and around Dhaka and Chittagong which are vulnerable to sea 
level rise.

Urban agglomeration: The next tier of cities outside of Dhaka will need better planning, 
infrastructure, and services to become more attractive to formal firms and skilled workers 
to incubate and nurture agglomeration externalities. They will also need improved 
intercity transport and digital connectivity so that these cities can integrate better into the 
domestic and international trade network and improve access to public services to the 
standards in metropolitan cities such as Dhaka and Chittagong.

Strengthen urban institutions, governance, and accountability: A well-governed city 
helps to deliver required services and attract more businesses and jobs, particularly in the 
industry and services sectors. Raising own revenues and tapping into possibilities for 
public-private partnerships to finance infrastructure and provision of services will require 
strengthened urban institutions, governance, and accountability.

Strengthening Managed Economic Migration for access to better jobs: International 
migration to Gulf economies, Korea, Malaysia, and other destinations has been a 
significant source of employment. However, the financial and transaction costs are high. 
The government should consider interventions to improve these systems, including (a) 
Government-to-Government Programs that can reduce costs if governance issues are 
effectively managed; and (b) Privately Mediated Recruitment, by strengthening the 
regulation of the recruitment agent market can help lower costs and improve outcomes.