A pickup in global growth 
coupled with strengthening 
business and consumer 
confidence have supported a 
notable recovery in Georgia.

The country benefited from the improved external demand in 2017. 
Global growth is estimated to have picked up in 2017 to 3.0 percent 
from 2.4 percent in 2016, reflecting gradual recovery in the euro 
area, China, emerging Europe, and Russia as commodity prices and 
financial markets continued to stabilize. With growth outcomes in 2017 
generally stronger than expected, Georgia’s annual growth estimate 
was revised to 4.2 percent, compared to an earlier projection of 3.5 
percent. Higher growth is likely to have improved population incomes, 
following adverse social outcomes in 2016 (figure 1). In 2016, poverty 
indicators deteriorated to 25.6 percent from 25.3 percent in 2015 (at 
US$3.2 a day in 2011 PPP terms).

The recovery in the first three quarters of 2017 was driven by a 
sharp increase in net exports, and—to a smaller extent—by private 
consumption; on the flipside, this was accompanied by a slight decline 
in overall gross investment (largely due to weakened inventories) and 
a considerable drop in public consumption. The benefits of a well-
managed monetary policy and adequate exchange rate flexibility on 
Georgia’s competitiveness were further supported by a firm economic 
recovery in its main trading partners, helping the current account deficit 
narrow significantly; a reduction to 9 percent of GDP is estimated as of 
end-2017.

Fiscal consolidation measures implemented under the 2017 budget 
and stronger than expected growth ensured a considerably improved 
fiscal stance, with the fiscal deficit at 3.4 percent of GDP by end-year. 
Key structural measures have been taken: (i) a new remuneration law 
for the civil service was approved by the Parliament as envisaged by 
the recently enacted Civil Service Law—it sets the salary ceilings and 
provisions to ensure that the public wage bill is consistent with the 
medium-term projections under the government’s fiscal framework; 
(ii) a new PPP law that is integrated with the overall investment plan 
and budget cycle was prepared and submitted to the parliament; also, a 
PPP unit has been established at the Prime Minister office; (iii) a Public 
Investment Management (PIM) framework was established in order 
to strengthen the monitoring of public investment; a dedicated Public 
Investment Unit was established at the Ministry of Finance (MoF); (iv) in 
the 2018 Budget, the fiscal risk annex includes a quantitative reporting 
of quasi-fiscal relationships, and expands the analysis of contingent 
liabilities associated to SOEs.

The gradual recovery is 
expected to continue 
on the back of prudent 
macroeconomic and fiscal 
policies and structural reform.

GDP growth is expected to rebound to 5 percent by 2020. The external 
sector will recover through a robust increase in net exports, with the 
main growth driver shifting to the external demand. The government 
has committed to contain its administrative expenses based on the 
package of fiscal consolidation measures, and expand the capital budget 
instead, helping address the remaining infrastructure bottlenecks. As a 
result, a gradual reduction in the fiscal deficit is expected to come from 
the robust GDP growth and a careful management in public spending. 
In addition, reforms in the non-banking financial sector, capital markets 
and pension system will be major steps towards strengthening the 
financial system and positioning it to support the recovery. Upside 
risks stem from a stronger-than-expected domestic demand and/or a 
sustained improvement in the external environment. Downside risks 
include inward-looking policies in advanced countries and weaker-
than-expected growth in both advanced and emerging economies, 
as a possible tightening in global financial conditions could threaten 
the growth momentum. However, an improved macro-fiscal stance, a 
flexible exchange rate, and well-capitalized, liquid banking system are 
in place in Georgia to help the country cope with negative shocks.

Tbilisi, the country’s capital and home to one third of its voters, elect-
ed the Mayor and its 50-member Sakrebulo. While the ruling Georgian 
Dream – Democratic Georgia won in all 73 electoral districts in the par-
ty list contest, the runner-ups offered a less homogenous picture. Ac-
cording to the national democratic institute (NDI), the legislative and 
electoral framework largely meets mostly international standards and 
is conducive to the conduct of democratic elections. NDI also noted 
that with the further consolidation of power in one party, prospects for 
a vibrant and pluralistic democracy are at risk and the responsibility lies 
with the country’s leadership to create an environment that promotes 
a genuinely inclusive governing process and strengthens democratic 
checks and balances.

The Georgian economy 
performed well in 2017, 
and GDP growth improved 
markedly, led by a stronger 
external environment, higher 
private consumption and 
supported by the macro-fiscal 
policy framework.

The external environment improved in 2017, as the recovery of the Rus-
sian economy and better prospects for the EU generated strong exter-
nal demand for Georgia’s exports. GDP growth in the Europe and Cen-
tral Asia region is expected to reach 2.2 percent in 2017, its strongest 
growth in six years (figure 2). In Georgia, driven by the solid recovery in 
exports (which rose by 21.3 percent in real terms), the economy grew 
by 4.8 percent in the first three quarters of 20173. Exports of goods 
and export of services both picked-up strongly. Tourism proceeds re-
mained especially robust with a strong positive contribution to export 
of services. Import increased as well, but at much lesser pace, with the 
trade balance improving considerably and net exports contributing up 
to 4.7 ppt to overall growth during the first three quarters of 2017. The 
fiscal consolidation reforms and flexible exchange rate policy supported 
smooth external adjustment.

The share of gross investments declined to 29.5 percent of GDP or 1.2 
ppt lower than in the first 9 months of 2016. Total investment growth 
decelerated to 0.7 percent in the real terms because of a weaker accu-
mulation of inventories. This might be associated with the postpone-
ment of investor decisions to build the stock in the pre-election period. 
Meanwhile, total fixed investments grew by 2.2 percent year-on-year in 
the first 9 months of 2017 (compared to 4 percent in the same period in 
2016). Based on the FDI composition in the same period, investments 
predominantly were directed to the transport, construction, and real 
estate sectors. Public investment has been strong throughout the year 
and it is estimated to have accelerated in the last quarter of 2017. This 
was driven by the government decision to increase capital budget al-

location through the end-year state budget amendment for 2017. It is 
expected that annual growth outcomes will demonstrate a strong con-
tribution from total investment, given the greater certainty following 
the-local election and the accelerated pace of the public investments in 
the last part of the year.

Meanwhile, total consumption 
slightly undermined the 
growth recovery in the first 9 
months of 2017.

Total consumption in real terms almost stagnated with limited contri-
bution to growth in the first three quarters of the year (figure 3). In con-
trast, the private consumption grew at almost 2 percent year-on-year 
driven by a credit growth and recovery in remittances. Domestic credit 
growth exceeded 18 percent on average in 9 months over the same 
period of 2016; in particular, loans to the households expanded by 23 
percent year-on-year. In addition, a continued recovery in remittances 
also stimulated private consumption. However, public consumption in 
real terms declined by 6 percent in the same period in-line with the im-
plementation of envisaged fiscal consolidation measures, such as an in-
troduction of wage- and hiring-related constraints for civil servants and 
stricter approach for purchase of goods and services in public sector.

The stronger performance in the construction sector is well aligned 
with the trends observed in FDI, (which generally dominated construc-
tion) as well as with the public investments in roads and municipal 
infrastructure. Trade benefited strongly from the enhanced external 
transactions, especially export of wine, mineral waters and beverages 
and contributed 0.9 ppt to 4.8 percent growth. Other service-related 
sectors, such as transport, communication, restaurants grew strongly 
as well by the rate above GDP growth (figure 4). These sectors highly 
benefit from the growing number of tourists traveling to Georgia. Al-
though tourism generates demand for agricultural products too, the 
sector still contracted by 2.7 percent annually, affected by a series of 
one-off shocks, including the unfavorable weather conditions and in-
sect epidemy that severely hit the harvest of walnuts – one of the key 
export products. The share of agriculture sector in GDP dropped to 6.9 
percent in the first 9 months of 2017 from 8 percent in the same period 
of 2016. This production shock adds to the striking trend of productivity 
decline in the agriculture sector, in a context in which the agri-sector 
holds about 50 percent of total employment.

Apart from one-time factors, such as the sharp increase in excise taxes 
on fuel and tobacco early in the year, the rising global oil prices, espe-
cially in the second half of the year were passed through to the econ-
omy. As a result, headline inflation stood significantly above the NBG’s 
target of 4 percent. Inflation as expected decreased considerably in the 
beginning of 2018 once the impact of one-time factors is fading out. In-
flation expectations also increased in the last months of 2017, partially 
driven by the depreciation of Lari in the last quarter of the year as trade

balance slightly deteriorated due to higher import of goods. In addition, 
the demand-driven inflation pressure emerged because of the better 
than expected economic performance. Annual inflation of 6.7 percent 
was much higher than 1.8 percent in December 2016, in response to 
which the NBG raised its policy rate by 0.75 ppt to 7.25 percent. The 
NBG increased its policy rate three times (on 25 January, 2 May and 13 
December) by 0.25 ppt every time during 2017 (figure 15).

An improvement in the trade balance arising from higher exports and 
muted imports resulted in the current account deficit falling to 7.1 per-
cent of GDP in the first three quarters of 2017 from 11.2 percent in 
the same period of 2016 (figure 5). Exports of goods expanded by 22 
percent on the back of strong external demand from Russia, Azerbaijan, 
Ukraine, China, and the US. Tourism proceeds rose by 29 percent as the 
number of foreign visitors in 2017 reached 7 more than 2 visitors per 
capita. The recovery in external demand boosted worker’s remittances 
by 17 percent year-on-year in the first three quarters of 2017. By con-
trast, the factor income balance weakened further due to the increased 
income profit repatriation by FDI shareholders, while a considerable 
part of it was reinvested, counting as an inflow in the capital and fi-
nancial account. Net FDI inflows increased in the first three quarters 
of 2017 to 10.6 percent of GDP year-on-year (compared to 9.1 percent 
of GDP a year earlier), which exceeded the current account deficit and 
along with other financial and capital inflows strengthened the interna-
tional reserve position of the country.

Georgia’s external position 
strengthened considerably, 
with the current account 
deficit narrowing.

The number of all 
types of visitors 
in 2017 increased 
by 18.8 percent 
year-on-year and 
reached 7.6 mil-
lion people, out of 
which 46 percent 
were classified as 
tourists (figure 7), 
with their num-
ber increased by 
28 percent. Top 
countries of ori-
gin were Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, Russia, 
Turkey and Iran. 
Money 
transfers 
registered through 
the banking system rose by 20 percent in 2017 driven by remittances 
from Israel and EU countries, such as Italy, Greece, Germany. Russia tra-
ditionally is the top country of origin for such transfers and inflows from 
this country increased by 15.5 percent reaching 33 percent of total.

Georgia is highly dependent on 
external financing, which has 
resulted in the accumulation 
of a large stock of external 
debt.

The banking sector is well 
capitalized, profitable and the 
level of NPLs is not concerning, 
but structural vulnerabilities 
remain high.

High dollarization is a crucial 
challenge for Georgia’s 
economy as it weakens 
effectiveness of the monetary 
policy transmission under the 
inflation targeting regime.

About 65 percent of the banking deposits were in foreign currency in 
the end of 2017, including 77 percent dollarization for individual depos-
itors. The banking sector’s long-term and short-term external debt is 
about 24 percent of GDP. On the asset side of the balance sheet, about 
57 percent of banks’ loans are foreign currency denominated (down 
from 65 percent in December 2016), including 69 percent of corporate 
loans and 46 percent of household loans (figure 10). High dollarization 
increases foreign exchange risk for borrowers, especially for non-ex-
porting, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and households that 
rely on income in local currency and are unhedged against the depre-
ciation of the Lari.

The combined assets of the two largest banks in Georgia were equiva-
lent to 65 percent of GDP as of 2017, rising from 29.3 percent in 2010; 
and their share over the same period increased to 71 percent of total 
banking sector assets from 58 percent. The top two banks5 also repre-
sent large financial-industrial groups. Their size brings scale benefits, 
greater risk diversification that helps sustain profitability, and access 
to international financing at an advantageous funding cost; but, if one 
of these banks were to fail, the impact on the financial system would 
be potentially substantial. The FSAP 2014 Update recommended the 
enhancement of the bank resolution framework and the introduction 
of an explicit deposit insurance system to strengthen existing financial 
stability and safety net framework. Law on Deposit Insurance was ad-
opted in June 2017. Deposit insurance coverage for household deposits 
came into effect on January 1, 2018.

According to the household survey data that covers both formal and in-
formal sectors, the overall unemployment rate declined to 11.8 percent 
in 2016 from 14.6 percent in 2013. Nevertheless, this level is one of the 
highest in the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region. The government’s 
success in attracting foreign investors through significant improvements 
in the business environment was not sufficient to improve employment 
outcomes in the country. New growth sectors, especially tourism and 
other services, have not been able to generate sufficient employment 
vis-a-vis those sectors that shed jobs. In addition, the existing educa-
tional system is not in line with the demands of the private sector, and 
student performance ranks low, generating a skills gap. Low net job 
creation (even during high-growth periods) led to high and sustained 
unemployment levels in the country which, in turn, have had a negative 
impact on poverty and shared prosperity. The currently unemployed 
and inactive population is close to 45 percent of the poor “bottom 40” 
population.6 In addition, the problem of low female participation at 57 
percent currently (77 percent for male) remains yet to be addressed.

Net job creation stagnated in 
2016 and important challenges 
remain.

The slowdown in employment 
creation had an adverse 
impact on poverty reduction 
which stalled in 2016.

The stagnation in poverty reduction breaks a declining trend that start-
ed in 2010, which was propelled mainly by employment opportunities 
and social assistance. The slight reduction in employment observed 
in urban areas translated into an increase in poverty in urban areas, 
though extreme poverty remained at the same level. Poverty at $3.2/
day (2011 PPP) was estimated at 18.7 percent in 2016, almost one per-
centage point higher than in 2015. The positive outcomes from labor 
markets in 2017, especially among the less-skilled, suggest poverty will 
start again to decline, but also highlights the vulnerability of the popu-
lation just above the poverty line to labor market fluctuations. Inequal-
ity, as measured by the Gini coefficient, has fallen from a peak of 42 
points in 2010 to close to 39 in 2016 (using the consumption aggregate 
used for international poverty comparison). Nonetheless, inequality 
is still among the highest in the ECA region and is evident along geo-
graphic dimension. For instance, regions located in the eastern parts of 
the country surrounding Tbilisi have poverty rates considerably higher 
than in the western regions or in Tbilisi. Similarly, along the urban-ru-
ral divide, the gap between rural and urban poverty rates has broadly 
been stable over the past decade, at an average of around 8 percent-
age points. While some differences in welfare across space are to be 
expected in any country, persistent gaps potentially signal chronic lack 
of economic opportunities in lagging regions.

Fiscal pressures from the 
expenditure side remained 
elevated in 2017, while 
the risks to sustainability 
diminished with a solid 
revenue performance and 
expenditure reshuffle.

The fiscal deficit in 2017 narrowed from 4.1 observed in 2016 to the 
estimated 3.4 percent of GDP (figure 13). The composition of expen-
diture was considerably rationalized to enhance fiscal sustainability. 
In order to prioritize social and infrastructure funding the authorities 
introduced ceilings on the wage bill and on the purchase of goods 
and services in the 2017 budget law. Savings for about 0.8 percentage 
points of GDP were generated in 2017 from reduced administrative 
costs. This helped—on one hand—to ease the fiscal pressure on social 
spending (which increased in nominal terms but declined by 0.5 per-
centage points as a ratio to GDP); and on the other hand, allowed the 
government to stimulate capital expenditures by 1.9 percentage points 
of GDP (figure 14). With the overall deficit at 3.4 percent of GDP the 
government freed-up more fiscal space than initially envisaged accord-
ing to the annual fiscal target (4.1 percent of GDP). The government 
took an advantage of the revenue windfall to advance payments for 
infrastructure projects in 2018.

Both tax and non-tax 
revenues of the general 
government had solid 
outcomes.

Despite earlier concerns over the possible losses from the PIT reform 
(applying the Estonian model starting in early 2017), collections from 
the corporate tax were strong. The profit tax exemption retained by 
the private sector as a result of the reform is estimated at GEL368m 
(1.3 percent of nominal GDP) in the first 9 months of 2017, which was 
slightly lower than budgeted (by about GEL46m), reducing the public 
revenue loss from the reform. Overperformance against the planned 
collections was particularly strong for the value-added tax (an addition-
al GEL300m or 11 percent higher) although this is partially explained by 
the inaccurate information about the actual VAT collections in 2016.7

Excise collections suffered despite the sharp increases in their rates. 
This was mainly attributable to the 3-month payment delay introduced 
for car importers and accumulation of inventories by the tobacco im-
porters at the end-of-year in anticipation of spike in excise rates for 
tobacco from January 1, 2017.

Georgia’s public debt remained 
sustainable at 45 percent of 
GDP8 as of end 2017.

A sharp increase in public debt in 2015 and 2016 was primarily driven by 
the depreciation of the Lari against the USD, while the increase in 2017 is 
attributable to operational borrowings and further (but more moderate) 
currency depreciation. About 79 percent of public debt in 2017 was ex-
ternal and dominated by long-term multilateral and bilateral debt. Given 
the concessional nature of public debt, interest payments are low and av-
erage at around one percent of GDP a year. Nearly 75 percent of external 
public debt is at fixed interest rates, thereby reducing interest rate risk. In 
addition, less than 5 percent of public debt is short-term, helping main-
tain rollover risks well contained. Georgia’s public debt is likely to decline 
to about 40 percent of GDP over the medium-term by 2022, supported by 
a gradual reduction in the fiscal deficit. Alternative scenarios confirm the 
need to reduce the fiscal deficit to stabilize the debt to GDP ratio in case 
of additional shocks, like further exchange rate depreciation9.

Georgia’s quasi-fiscal 
risks emanating from the 
contingent liabilities of the 
State-Owned Enterprises 
(SOEs) are estimated to be 
substantial.

addition, the government (together with the IMF and the WB) closely 
monitors contingent liabilities generated by the government’s Power 
Purchasing Agreements (PPAs). Under these PPAs the state issues guar-
antee to purchase excess electricity from the operators on a seasonal 
basis. As of end 2017 there were 72 signed PPAs, of which 18 are linked 
to power plants that are already operational, 16 are under construc-
tion, 19 are awaiting the licenses and another 19 are at the assessment 
stage. While the fiscal risks of PPAs are high, the needs for additional 
power capacity are also evident from the consumption growth trend. 
Therefore, the Government is committed to review carefully its deci-
sions going forward and ensure compliance of the new PPAs with the 
recently adopted Law on Public Private Partnerships. The latter will be 
enacted on March 31, 2018.

Georgia’s floating exchange 
rate policy is consistent with 
its inflation targeting regime.

This regime allowed the NBG to conduct of an independent monetary 
policy, facilitated the economy’s adjustment to the shock, and prevent-
ed exchange rate misalignments. Under the floating exchange rate re-
gime, in 2017 the NBG opted to buy foreign exchange to improve its 
international reserves position. Gross international reserves reached 
US$3.0 billion as of end 2017 (which is about 4 months of import of 
goods and services), the first time since 2013. In Georgia, the Lari-dol-
lar exchange rate fluctuated between GEL2.77 per dollar in January 
2017 to GEL2.38 in April, ending the year at around GEL2.55 per dollar 
and triggering higher inflation expectations (figure 16). In real terms, 
the exchange rate was volatile as well. It appreciated by 10 percent 
through January-April. The real effective exchange rate depreciated 
by 11 percent during May-November, impacting positively on export 
competitiveness. The NBG believes that a higher volume in the foreign 
exchange forward market could help smooth exchange rate seasonality.

The NBG’s inflation target is 4 percent in 2017 and 3 percent for the 
medium-term. As the annual inflation spiked to 6.7 percent in 2017, 
the NBG increased the policy rate from 6.50 in January to 7.25 percent 
in December (figure 15) in response to the emerging inflation expec-
tations caused by the significant increase in excise taxes on tobacco 
and fuel in 2017. The NBG appropriately considers it as a one-off spike 
which will expire in early 2018 and further monetary policy tightening 
will likely not be necessary. Inflation expectations also increased in the 
recent months driven by the depreciation of Lari in the last quarter of 
the year. In December 2016, the NBG introduced a new monetary pol-
icy instrument—a one-month open market refinancing loan. Through 
this policy instrument, the NBG supplies short-term liquidity to the 
banking system when needed.

This assumes that structural reforms will support rapid growth in in-
vestment, employment, and firm productivity, while also ensuring the 
realization of potential benefits associated with the DCFTA in terms of 
higher exports and FDI. The following top priority reforms were initiat-
ed or launched in recent years.

• A new remuneration law for the civil service was approved by the 
Parliament as envisaged by the recently enacted Civil Service Law. 
The salary ceilings and provisions set by the remuneration law will 
ensure that public wage bill is consistent with the medium-term 
wage bill projections under the IMF program;

• Pension reform has been moving forward supported by the WB, 
ADB and other development partners. A roadmap was completed 
and published as part of the pension reform strategy published in 
March 2016. The draft law was approved by the Cabinet for public 
consultation in March 2017 and was presented to Parliament for 
discussion in December 2017. It is expected to be approved during 
2018 spring session to start implementation from July 2018;

• Deposit insurance system (DIS): To foster savings in the economy 
and enhance the financial and social safety net, the authorities 
committed to develop a. The government approved the Strategy 
and Action Plan on Introduction of DIS in Georgia on March 2, 2017 
and the Parliament adopted the Law on DIS on May 17, 2017. This 
key recommendation of the 2014 FSAP will help Georgia to meet 
the related EU AA commitments on the DIS.

Positive external 
developments have helped 
to accelerate growth in 
Georgia, benefiting from 
the resilience demonstrated 
during the recent crisis.

Georgia’s growth of 4.8 percent in the three quarters of 2017 was high-
er than expected in the beginning of the year and the annual estimates 
were upgraded to 4.2 percent for 2017 driven by a strong recovery in 
exports and growth in private consumption. Steady implementation of 
the reform program will result in a gradual acceleration of growth over 
the medium-term to 5 percent by 2020. The annual CPI inflation is ex-
pected to converge to the NBG’s target of 3 percent by year-end 2018, 
and the current account deficit will narrow to 9 percent of GDP by 2020.

Fiscal operations will continue 
to gradually shift from current 
to capital spending in the 
medium-term.

Considerable consolidation of administrative spending, streamlining of 
the subsidies and a more efficient social safety net will help to achieve 
medium-term fiscal consolidation while providing space for capital 
spending. The fiscal deficit of the general government will be gradually 
reduced to 3 percent of GDP by 2020, helping stabilize public debt at 
around 40 percent of GDP. Increasing public investment to reduce infra-
structure bottlenecks will be made possible by reducing current spending 
from 24.5 percent of GDP in 2017 to 22.4 percent in 2020. This will be 
achieved primarily by improving the efficiency of public spending: con-
taining the wage bill and administrative expenses which were increasing 
steadily and steeply for at least last 4-5 years, better targeting subsidies 
and social assistance programs.

The 2018 State Budget Law outlines continued consolidation path to 
maintain the deficit at 3.4 percent of GDP. Such outcome will not be au-
tomatic – it will require continued rationalization of current spending, 
including (i) further containing the wage bill and administrative expenses 
consistent with the new civil service law; (ii) improving the targeting of 
subsidies and of social assistance programs, (iii) reducing transfers and 
privatizing loss-making state-owned enterprises (SOEs); and (iv) improv-
ing performance-based budgeting.

Monetary policy will 
continue to operate within 
the framework of inflation 
targeting with exchange rate 
flexibility.

NBG targets inflation at 3 percent from 2018 onwards. Inflation is 
forecasted to remain above 4 percent target in 2017, mainly a result 
of a hike in excises. With the effects of temporary factors expiring in 
2018, inflation will converge towards target by the year-end. Foreign 
exchange interventions will be limited to smoothing excessive volatility 
of the exchange rate. The level of gross international reserves, currently 
below the level recommended by the IMF’s Assessing Reserve Adequa-
cy (ARA) metric, will be raised throughout the program. The monetary 
policy transmission mechanism will be strengthened by promoting lar-
ization of loans and deposits.

The current account deficit 
is projected to fall below 10 
percent of GDP in 2018 and 
2019, supported by export 
growth and tourism.

The deficit will continue to be financed by the FDI, as new projects de-
velop and BP pipeline project financing fades out (Table 3). Meanwhile, 
the Government program is expected to improve external competitive-
ness. Ambitious structural reforms, together with the continued im-
plementation of the EU-Georgia Association Agreement and free trade 
agreements with China and other countries, will support access to new 
markets and economic diversification. Improving further the business 
environment will help mobilize FDI in tradable sectors, improve com-
petitiveness and reduce external vulnerabilities.

Georgia’s public debt is 
projected to decline to 40 
percent of GDP by 2022.

The downside risks to the baseline scenario are associated with (i) fur-
ther tightening of US monetary policy and Lari depreciation; (ii) deteri-
oration in the external environment including a weaker EU outlook and 
regional geopolitical tensions; and (iii) potential delays in implemen-
tation of consolidation measures, or accumulation of new liabilities or 
materialization of contingent liabilities. Given the large part of the debt 
is denominated in US dollars, a 37 percent10 Lari depreciation would 
push public debt to 46 percent of GDP by 2022, while with higher real 
interest rates11, public debt would grow to close to 43 percent of GDP. 
Under a lower GDP growth scenario public debt would rise above 48 
percent by 2022, while combined risks would push public debt to 63 
percent of GDP by 2022.

Total external debt 
excluding intercompany 
loans, is projected to decline 
to about 90 percent of GDP 
in the medium term.

However, projections remain highly sensitive to changes in macroeco-
nomic assumptions. Deterioration of non-interest current account gap 
and lower growth shock would push external debt to 103 percent and 
100 percent of GDP, respectively. Yet, external debt is most sensitive to 
the 30 percent exchange rate depreciation shock which would push the 
debt to 134 percent of GDP by 2022.

• Georgia remains vulnerable to regional developments given its high 
current account deficit, and the risks of low export demand and re-
mittances. More inward-oriented policies and weaker economic 
growth in key advanced and emerging economies could undermine 
efforts to promote trade. Spillover effects from geopolitical uncer-
tainties and potentially slower-than-expected recovery in the EU, 
could potentially dampen investment inflows to Georgia and in-
crease external imbalances. At 95 percent of GDP in 2017 (or 112 
percent including intercompany loans), external debt is very high 
and tighter global financial conditions and a stronger U.S. dollar 
could deteriorate debt dynamics further. Loan dollarization at 65 
percent in 2017 increases the vulnerability of the financial sector 
to exchange rate risks as well. Mitigating factors include a flexible 
exchange rate policy, the new program with the IMF, and market 
access;

Fragile growth, continued 
fiscal pressures, a large current 
account deficit, and high 
external debt are the main 
risks to the economy.

• With growth prospects improving in the economies of key trading 
partners, the output expansion in Georgia is likely to be improved as 
well. However, the banking sector remains fragile in many countries, 
and exposures have grown in countries that depend on commodity 
exports. This risk is mitigated, to an extent, by the structural reforms 
being undertaken by the government to improve competitiveness 
and the investment climate in the country. Relative price changes 
have opened up the opportunity for increased exports, but in most 
cases structural reform is needed to realize these opportunities;

• Fiscal risks largely emanate from pressures to further increase so-
cial spending on pensions, social protection and health programs, as 
well as PPPs and PPAs. Fiscal space from efficiency improvements in 
social areas should play a crucial mitigating role in overall fiscal man-
agement and prudence deficit over the medium-term. In addition, 
public contingent liabilities also pose a risk, especially, those arising 
from power purchase agreements (PPAs) signed by the government 
and from quasi-fiscal activities by state-owned enterprises. These 
contingent liabilities need to be monitored and managed steadfast-
ly to avoid the devolvement of additional liabilities on the budget. 
Mitigating factors include the SOE and public investment manage-
ment reforms, government’s commitment to fiscal consolidation as 
evidenced by the 2018 Budget.

Georgia has embedded 
remarkable improvements in 
its business climate over the 
last decade.

Gross FDI inflows reached its peak in 2007 at about 18 percent of GDP 
and remained relatively high (in a range of 6-10 percent of GDP) since 
then, despite of several external and domestic shocks. It is important to 
understand whether these FDI inflows contribute to growth and meet 
expectations of policy makers, which relate to FDI fulfilling insufficient 
capital inflows, encouraging export growth, decreasing unemployment, 
intensifying the economic development, raising the main macroeco-
nomic parameters (GDP and GDP per capita) and the country’s interna-
tional economic competitiveness.

This chapter aims to assess the factors that define FDI structure and 
composition in the country and its impact on the Georgian economy. 
It reviews country and sector composition of FDI and identifies drivers 
and constraints associated with the FDI inflows. Based on the findings 
of this analysis possible solutions and recommendations are suggested.

• There is a significant concentration of FDI in the large transport-re-
lated projects in Georgia. Further analysis will be critical to under-
stand why this sector has become particularly attractive, and how its 
positive impact can be maximized into the domestic economy; 
• A skills mismatch, inadequate infrastructure and limited access to 
finance constrains local as well as foreign firms despite favorable 
business climate and relatively resilient macroeconomic environ-
ment;
• While theoretically FDI has a positive effect on employment, in the 
case of Georgia the empirical relationship between employment 
and FDI seems tenuous at best; at the same time, there is a strong 
positive correlation between employment in different sectors and 
investments in fixed assets almost for all the sectors. Further de-
tailed analysis is needed to understand how different investment 
projects have been linked to direct impacts on employment, and 
whether there have been any spillovers or second-round effects;

- A skills mismatch, inadequate 
infrastructure and limited 
access to finance constrains 
foreign firms;

- The empirical relationship 
between employment and FDI 
seems tenuous at best;

- FDI may generate large 
outflows or repatriation of 
profits in the medium to long-
run.

• FDI has largely financed the current account gap in recent years; 
however, it may generate large outflows or repatriation of profits in 
the medium to long-run if productivity of firms is not improved over 
time and does not generate exports;
• Improve FDI statistics to allow policy makers better to identify FDI 
inflows that are related to the mergers/acquisitions and greenfield 
investment, as well as their direct and indirect impact on output and 
employment in different sectors and at the macro level;
• Improve the legal framework, identify existing deterrents to FDI still 
present in the economy, and implement public policies to encour-
age investments in a diverse set of sectors (such as agriculture, min-
ing, light manufacturing, ect.), and attract responsible investors;
• Ensure that the level of educational attainment, provision of infra-
structure services, local technological capabilities and development 
of domestic financial markets capture full benefits associated with 
the FDI; 
• Maintain a level playing field and a stable, certain, simple and trans-
parent tax system.

Way forward for the FDI 
attraction requires improved 
legal framework, educated and 
skilled work force, transparent 
and simple tax system and 
comprehensive statistical 
information.

In neoclassical growth models, FDI promotes the accumulation of capi-
tal stock that eventually contributes to economic growth. These models 
are based on the assumption that the efficiency of domestic capital is 
the same as that of foreign capital. Therefore, FDI inflow has no spill-
over effect on the host economy through technological transfer, but 
only through the increase in an input of production.

In practice, FDI has added 
benefits, as the efficiency of 
foreign capital tends to be 
significantly higher than that 
domestic capital.

FDI is typically carried out by multinational corporations that invest a 
large amount of money in R&D to improve their technological capa-
bilities. Indeed, Yu et al. (2011) claim that FDI is one of the most im-
portant channels for technological dissemination. As a result, FDI not 
only increases the amount of capital goods in the host country, but also 
improves the quality and variety of production technologies (Melnyk et 
al., 2014). In addition, the transfer of advanced technologies leads to 
“technological diffusion” – the presence of technologically advanced 
foreign companies makes it easier for domestic producers to adopt 
new technologies and improve the efficiency of their business activities 
(Neuhaus, 2006).

In sum, FDI also has a 
number indirect spillovers, 
including:

(1) increased competition in the host economy and improved quality 
of domestic firms; (2) the sharing of technologies and experience to 
domestic suppliers and building more efficient sales networks; and (3) 
transferred knowledge by sharing technical and managerial know-how 
to local employees through labor force training (Blomstrom & Kokko, 
1997).

Nevertheless, in some cases, 
FDI might pose risks for the 
domestic economy.

According to Schoors at al. (2002), when the host country is in the early 
stage of development, FDI might weaken the market position of local 
producers (even productive ones) and cause structural unemployment. 
Moreover, profit repatriation and increased dependence on foreign in-
vestors are considered as other channels for a negative contribution.

FDI is an important 
macroeconomic indicator 
for policymakers in Georgia 
despite problems with its 
reliability.

Often officially available data on Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) fails 
to consistently reflect a country’s business environment and attrac-
tiveness for foreign investors. Thus, using FDI numbers for economic 
analysis could lead to misleading results due to a lack of background 
information on the nature of a particular investment and its calculation 
methodology, (Mosiashvili & Pkhakadze, 2015).

The dynamics of FDI in Georgia 
reflect three distinct phases 
in the country’s economic and 
political development.

This low diversification can be explained by the large investments made 
in the construction of oil and gas pipelines connecting Azerbaijan and 
Turkey (and later Europe), by BP, the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan 
(SOCAR), Chevron, etc. The share of net FDI inflows from the top ten 
countries always exceeded 70 percent of the total during the three 
phases distinguished in Table 1. Azerbaijan, the United States, the Unit-
ed Kingdom and Turkey are countries which have regularly invested in 
Georgia

The sectoral distribution of FDI 
in Georgia is similarly highly 
concentrated.

The transport and communications sector was dominated by large 
investment projects: in particular, the construction of the Baku-Tbili-
si-Ceyhan (BTC) Pipeline, the South Caucasus Pipeline and its further 
expansion, and the Baku-Tbilisi-Kars railway, attracted nearly 25 per-
cent of total foreign investment in 2007-2016. The energy and manu-
facturing sectors received 13.4 percent and 12.3 percent of total FDI in 
that period, respectively. Agriculture and fishing – a sector that, accord-
ing to Geostat, employed about 870,000 people (about 50 percent of 
the labor force) in 2016 – has not been popular with foreign investors. 
Only 1.2 percent of net FDI inflows ended up in this sector during 2007-
2016.

Statistical analysis of FDI 
data by country and by 
sector shows that Georgia is 
highly dependent on large 
multinational companies and 
their investment interests.

In 2015, around 70 percent of entire FDI to Georgia could be attribut-
ed to six large-scale projects, which were dominated by infrastructure 
investments (Movchan & Saha, 2016). The largest single investor com-
pany was BP, and its interests in the region brought a significant part 
of FDI to Georgia. According to Geostat data, BP was the biggest FDI 
source for Georgia in four consecutive years (2013-2016), with more 
than $2 billion invested in country during 2014-2017 in the South Cau-
casus Pipeline Expansion (SCPX) project alone. Another example of 
the importance of large foreign investors is the Hualing Group, which 
brought more than $500 million into Georgia since 2007, most which 
was invested in 2013-2015 (Larsen, 2017).

According to the empirical 
literature, several factors 
determine the investment

Market size, a stable economic and political situation, together with 
favorable investment environment and efficient domestic markets 
create good starting point for foreign investors to think about making

climate in a country and define 
the level of competitiveness of 
the domestic economy.

large investments in a developing country. Therefore, development of 
human capital, quality of infrastructure, access to financing, stable tax 
system, legal framework and government policy, macroeconomic sta-
bility and economic conditions of the main partner countries are main 
determinants of the country’s attractiveness for foreign investors.

However, the interaction 
between host countries’ 
characteristics and FDI might 
vary across countries’ level 
of development and resource 
abundance.

Research has identified four types of foreign direct investment in terms 
of investors’ motivation: natural-resource-seeking FDI, market-seek-
ing FDI, efficiency-seeking FDI and strategic-asset-seeking FDI (USAID, 
2005). Each type of FDI needs a different treatment from domestic pol-
icymakers. Georgia has a potential to attract efficiency-seeking FDI and 
use its favorable geographic location and exploit investment potential 
in the transit sector. Investments in this sector (for example, the large 
BP investment) require political stability; in addition, efficiency-seeking 
FDI needs competitively-priced inputs and labor, and fast technological 
development. Sectorial and country diversification achieved by focus-
ing on the different type of investments will make FDI inflows more 
sustainable and will further contribute to the sustainable development.

Therefore, it is important for the domestic government to implement 
effective education policies that directly enhance the domestic skill 
base and serve other two important functions: i) attracting FDI, as for-
eign investors are mainly seeking a new location with pre-existing hu-
man capital (Noorbakhsh et al., 2001); and ii) ensuring that the local 
workforce has enough capacity to absorb skill spillovers from the activ-
ities of the transnational corporation is the host country (Blomström et 
al., 2003).

Literature shows that the level 
of human capital is important 
determinant of attracting 
FDI, especially in the capital-
intensive sectors that are the 
most FDI intensive sectors for 
Georgian reality.

Given Georgia’s economic structure relatively few jobs require tertiary 
education. The majority of the population is working in the relatively 
low-productivity agricultural and trade sectors, where demand on the 
college graduates is quite limited. Therefore, the supply of the educat-
ed workforce exceeds its demand. Moreover, some workers with tertia-
ry education may have knowledge that is far from that required when 
high-skills jobs are created. This phenomenon in the economic litera-
ture is known as “skills mismatching”. According to the World Bank’s 
article: “Georgia: Skills Mismatch and Unemployment, Labor Market 
Challenges”, if all of the unemployed in Georgia were employed and 
new jobs require the same education profile as the existing ones, 22 
percent of people with a tertiary education would not be able to find a 
job and 31 percent of the jobs requiring vocational skills would not be 
filled by workers with vocational education. Nowadays, many people 
with tertiary education are working on positions that require vocational

skills. At the same time, employers have difficulties to find people with 
specific professional education, such as IT technicians, production line 
workers, tractor operators, and hotel management personnel (Livny 
and Biermann, 2016). In addition, Georgia is ranked 107th country in 
the world by the quality of its education system with a relatively low 
score of 3 out of 7 (Global Competitiveness Report (2017-18)). There-
fore, despite high literacy rate and high demand on higher education, 
the quality of education (evaluated by international scores e.g. Pisa 
Score or TIMMS Score) still remains an important constrain.

The quality and availability 
of internal and international 
transport services in Georgia 
have improved significantly, 
according to the “Georgian 
Transport Sector Assessment, 
Strategy, and Road Map” 
(2014) according to the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB).

Furthermore, a contribution of the transport sector to gross domestic 
product (GDP) substantially increased from $285 million in 1996 to $2.1 
billion in 2011, reaching 14 percent of GDP. However, authors identify 
bottlenecks in sector development: rural transport services that does 
not meet demand of economy, almost road-based passenger transport, 
inefficient distribution of tariffs and etc

Georgia is characterized 
by an increasing trend of 
infrastructure investment in

In addition, according to the OECD statistics, Georgia spent more than 
15 mln Euro on road maintenance in 2014. However, ADB concluded 
that annual expenditure on maintenance is not sufficient to keep entire

road system in good condition. In addition to the poor maintenance, 
overburdened foreign trucks further aggravates this problem (ADB, 
2009). This finding is confirmed by the Global Competitiveness Report 
(2016-17), as Georgia occupies 75Th and 78th positions in the global 
ranking in terms of quality of infrastructure and quality of roads re-
spectively

As a country with open 
economy with the high share 
of FDI, remittances and export 
of services and FDI, the 
Georgian economy is sensitive 
to episodes of economic crisis 
and recovery in the region.

Table 2 offers a perspective on the linkages and dependencies of Geor-
gia on other countries with respect to external factors in 2016. Dark-
er colors correspond to stronger linkages and, consequently, stronger 
spillover effects. For example, Russia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Turkey each 
absorbed between 7-10 percent of Georgian exports. Thus, the pro-
jected economic recovery in Russia and Azerbaijan after slowdown 
of economic growth in 2014-2016 will have positive influence on the 
Georgian economic parameters. While the country has pursued im-
portant Euro-Atlantic integration goals, AA and DCFTA with EU, Geor-
gia’s economic ties with neighboring countries and member of CIS were 
stronger than with EU in 2016. However, recent association and trade 
agreements and the Visa-free regime imposed in 2017 are expected 
to decrease dependence of Georgia on volatile CIS countries towards 
more stable EU and faster growing China.

Georgia has a liberal and 
business-friendly legislative 
framework however the gaps 
on judicial independence 
undermines its attractiveness 
for foreign investors.

According to Doing Business 2018, Georgia ranked 9th among 190 
countries and highest in Europe and Central Asia Region. The result 
was achieved by implementing 47 reforms during last 15 years, which 
is the highest number among countries in the ECA region. In addition, 
the Georgian legal framework can be further improved by structural 
reforms in trading across borders and resolving insolvency. It is worth 
noting that according to the Global Competitiveness index (2017-2018) 
of the World Economic Forum, the legal framework in Georgia is behind 
best international practice with regard to (1) the efficiency in settling 
disputes and efficiency in challenging regulations; (2) the presence of 
favoritism in decisions of government officials and (3) the gaps on judi-
cial independence that reduced the attractiveness of the Georgian legal 
framework for foreign investors.

Georgia’s tax system is based 
on sound foundations and by 
and large, the system follows 
international best practices.

Georgia has a flat tax system considered to be rather efficient by re-
gional standards. After a series of reforms in 2003-07 to simplify the tax 
system, eradicate border smuggling and enhance tax administration, 
Georgia’s tax collections improved dramatically and reached 25 percent 
of GDP by 2007. Tax revenues have been a stable source of revenue at 
24-26 percent of GDP since 2007 despite periods of high growth vola-
tility in 2009, 2013 and 2015. Income tax in Georgia is collected at a flat 
rate of 20 percent, while the value-added tax (VAT) and corporate tax 
are levied at a flat rate of 18 percent and 15 percent respectively. As of 
2017, the VAT constituted the largest single source of revenues at 40 
percent of the total; income tax contributed 25 percent, profit tax 12 
percent and excises 10 percent. Electronic filing is the norm and the tax 
administration is well-geared on modern lines with additional reforms 
under discussion. To preempt any reversal of the tax reforms and pro-
vide certainty, a Liberty Act was enacted in 2014 to ban new state tax 
or rate increase without a referendum for most taxes, which has limited 
potential tax revenue increases. Excise taxes are an exception to this 
rule and therefore has been raised frequently, with the last increase in 
January 2017

Reinvested or retained profits are no more subject to income tax; only 
distributed profits will be taxed by 15 percent. This tax incentive is ex-
pected to boost reinvestment and overall investment level; the prelimi-
nary statistics suggest that the reform already had effect on investment 
decisions – the reinvestment component of FDI made in the first half 
of 2017, showed a record annual increase of 263 percent from $97.8 
million in previous year.

In 2017, the Georgian 
government implemented 
an important initiative and 
introduced a new taxation 
scheme of corporate income 
(the “Estonian model”)

Box 2. The tax reform in Estonia 
With the tax reform, Estonia became the most competitive country among OECD members and one the largest 
stocks of FDI per capita among EU accession candidates in 2002. The reinvested corporate profits were no longer 
subject to income tax. Its income tax system, 20 percent flat income tax rate, at that time was considered as one of 
the simplest tax systems in the world. This simple and clear tax system contributed to confidence among business-
es and helped promote capital investment. The competitive tax environment was vital in attracting foreign direct 
investments to Estonia. The Estonian corporate tax system has been conducive to economic growth. In fact, after 
Estonia enacted its cash-flow corporate tax in 2000, investment surged relative to its neighbors. Between 2000 and 
2004, investment growth in Estonia was 39 percentage points faster than neighboring Latvia and Lithuania. The 
increase in FDI coincided with the exemption of reinvested earnings from corporate income tax since 2000, the 
model that Georgia adopted in 2017.

In addition, Georgia exempts 
incomes from certain sources, 
as it aims to encourage
 investment from these sources.

One of the important exemptions is for foreign source income. This is 
likely to be availed by individuals who are high income as low income 
individuals are not likely to derive their income from foreign sources. 
Similarly, capital gains accrue on capital ownership over a period of 
time. High income individuals would hold assets that accumulate cap-
ital gains over time. In the case of the exemptions for foreign source 
income and long-term capital gains, the beneficiaries are likely to be 
high-income taxpayers. The high-income taxpayers can be domestic 
or foreign depending upon the ownership structure of the industry in 
Georgia. These tax exemptions appear to be aimed at promoting pri-
vate investment.

Achieving macroeconomic 
stability remains a 
necessary, but not sufficient, 
condition for attracting 
investments.

It is widely recognized that the stable macroeconomic environment fur-
ther reduces risk for FDI, allows better planning, ensures a robust do-
mestic demand, and a good platform for exports. As mentioned before, 
the fall of commodity prices on world markets, global appreciation of 
dollar and weakened regional demand in 2014-2016 year put pressure 
on macroeconomic stability in Georgia. Taken together, these factors 
were the main contributors to the sluggish economic growth in 2015 
and created further obstacles to attract foreign investments. The macro 
environment has generally been supportive to FDI during 2017 – with 
important efforts to contain inflation, maintain a floating, stable, fully 
convertible and transparent exchange rate regime. In addition, fiscal 
policy and the external sector have been supportive to growth but they 
do represent some important risks (increased debt burden on borrow-
ers, for both private sector and the government; contingent liabilities) 
that the government is mindfully addressing. Overall, the macro envi-
ronment does not seem to have acted as a deterrent for FDI, though the 
volatility in regional conditions and prospects inevitably plays a role.

In recent years, investments have been the main source of economic 
growth for Georgia (see Figure 25). Especially after the regional crisis in 
2014, growth in Gross Capital Formation (that measures total investment) 
was the main source of real GDP growth in Georgia, neutralizing the high 
negative contribution of the significantly deteriorated trade balance. Gross 
Capital Formation contains two components: Gross Fixed Capital Forma-
tion (GFCF) and change in inventories. The first measure can be used to 
evaluate fixed capital formation in the economy, which, according to the 
theoretical foundations, determines the short-run growth of the country. 
However, it is hard to determine the role of FDI in acquiring fixed capital. 
FDI can be used to finance fixed capital formation, but it can also be used 
to finance the deficit of a company and/or to pay off a loan. Therefore, the 
share of FDI in GFCF can only be approximated based on the part of the 
fixed capital that was acquired using FDI. The evolution of FDI as a share of 
GFCF has followed a similar pattern to the evolution of FDI. During the ear-
ly years of transition, the share was relatively low, but after 2005 (during 
the global economic boom) it started to accelerate rapidly and reached a 
peak value of 77 percent. Following the 2008 financial crisis, the share fell 
rapidly to a low of 23 percent, and it now stands at 36 percent.

According to the theoretical 
foundations, one of the 
most important channel FDI 
contributes to economic 
growth is through the 
acquisition of capital stock 
(real investment).

This leads to a large (yet sustainable) Current Account (CA) deficit (see 
Figure 27). The imbalance in the CA usually exceeds 10 percent of GDP 
and has been characterized by an increasing trend over the last three 
years that is just starting to reverse in 2017. In Georgia, FDI remains 
the main source of financing the CA deficit. For example, 75 percent of 
the deficit was financed by FDI in 2016 and this number was close to 
70 percent for both 2014 and 2015 as well. Therefore, it is important to 
make productive investments that can be directed to closing the gap in 
the current account.

FDI affects economic growth 
through different transmission 
channels, of which the trade 
channel is one of the most 
important, especially for 
countries like Georgia.

FDI promotes exports by making country more competitive in price and 
quality, increasing productivity through capital accumulation, improv-
ing transport infrastructure and production facilities, attracting new 
technologies and know-how. In case of Georgia the effect should be 
even stronger – developing country with tiny domestic market and lib-
eral trade regime with rest of the world should attract export oriented 
FDIs.

However, FDI affects not only 
exports, but also imports.

At the initial stage of investment phase, FDI negatively affects trade 
balance through increasing imports of machineries, equipment, oth-
er capital goods and services of foreign experts. In the later phases of 
the investment the effect on imports is dependent on input nature and 
output type of production. If FDI uses domestic raw materials and in-
termediary goods in production process, it will not have adverse effect 
on imports. If FDI is concentrated in industries which produces goods 
that are complementary to the imported products, it may encourage 
imports. However, if investments are made in sector which consists of 
import substituting industries, it would shrink import values.

For this reason, our analysis observes correlations between FDI in these 
sectors and trade indicators in 2007-2016. The results shown in table 5 
suggest that:

• Accumulated stocks of FDI have a stronger correlation with trade in-
dicators than its flows. It could be explained by the fact that invest-
ment needs time to affect production and exports. 
• Correlation between imports of capital goods and FDI indicators are 
positive, suggesting that FDI in Georgia is associated with increasing 
imports at the initial stage. 
• Generally, there is no strong linkage between net FDI flows and trade 
indicators. Georgian exports are dependent on various variables like 
regional demand, geopolitical situation in the region and trade rela-
tionship with neighbors.

More generally, FDI in 
transport and 
communication (mainly 
made by BP) are expected to 
have a net positive impact 
on trade for the country in 
the long run.

The increased import of raw materials and intermediary goods in the 
initial stage production process will gradually be outweighed by ben-
efits from transit of oil and gas through pipelines in the future. Fur-
thermore, Georgia benefits from these projects in different ways. For 
example, two major regional oil pipelines – Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) 
and South Caucasus pipeline Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum (Shah-Deniz) signifi-
cantly increase Georgia’s export potential. According to the agreement 
made between Georgia and Azerbaijan around BTC pipeline13, Geor-
gia will receive around US$ 2.1 billion (as a transit fee) during the 40 
years contract functioning time, which corresponds to the 62.5 million 
dollars per year. Also, per the agreement around South Caucasus pipe-
line Georgia is not only transit country but also a natural gas consumer 
country. Therefore, Georgia has an option to purchase 5% of gas ex-
ported from Azerbaijan to Turkey for a favorable price and get addition-
al half a million cubic meter gas from the project investors at a special 
price (Georgian Oil and Gas Corporation).

To analyze the impact on 
trade of FDI in its second 
largest recipient sector of 
energy (with 13 percent 
share in total FDI) one could 
look at the exports and 
imports of electricity.

Georgia is a net importer of electricity, and domestic generation is usu-
ally less than domestic demand. Currently, FDI is ongoing in the ener-
gy sector, particularly to develop new HPPs and promising aspects of 
these investments include: First, increased domestic generation that 
will save significant part of electricity imports. The demand on electric-
ity in the country rose significantly from 7,800 million kW/h in 2007 to 
11,026 million kW/h in 2017, constituting a 41% increase. Therefore, 
investments in electricity generation saved for the country about 483.6 
million USD on electricity imports during the last ten years compared to 
the scenario where generation powers freeze on 2007 level.14 Second, 
investments in the electricity sector further increase the electricity ex-
port potential of the country especially in the summer time. Beyond 
this significant direct impact on trade, there is indirect positive effect 
on the whole economy through lower electricity prices.

While all of these benefits are considered as crucial ones for country’s 
development, particular emphasis is placed on the contribution of FDI 
to the productivities of the domestic industries. According to the theo-
retical foundations, the transfer of technologies and knowledge result-
ing from FDI inflows goes beyond actual projects of foreign investors 
and benefits domestic firms. However, there is no empirical evidence 
that this positive spillover actually exists. The firm-level panel data 
and case study analysis show that the importance of these theoretical 
spillover channel is commonly exaggerated for developing countries15. 
There are more optimistic findings based on the industry-level stud-
ies that rely on cross-sectorial data, but the main disadvantage of this 
methodology is the difficulty in establishing the direction of causality 
(Javorcik, 2003).

FDI affects economic growth 
through different spillover 
channels, including by bringing 
capital, new technologies, 
know-how marketing and 
management skills.

While there is no empirical 
literature that studies the 
impact of the FDI inflows

15 Haddad and Harrison (1993) on Morocco, Aitken and Harrison (1999) on Venezuela, and Djankov and Hoekman (2000) on the Czech 
Republic doubt that there is any spillover effect of FDI on the productivity of industries. However, it worth noting that Haskel, Pereira, 
and Slaughter (2002) and Keller and Yeaple (2003) identified positive spillover in the United Kingdom and United States, respectively. 
16 Community, social and personal service activities could be considered as a high productive sector, but we should take into 
consideration the fact that small share of this sector in number of employed people and added value.

on sectoral productivity in 
Georgia, data suggests that 
the sectors that were the most 
attractive for foreign investors 
experienced the highest 
productivity gain in the recent 
decade.

sector, and industry, where real17 value added per employed person 
even reaches 315, 253 and 233 thousand lari respectively18, have been 
the most attractive sectors for foreign investors in the recent decade. 
Furthermore, these sectors were characterized by large amount of in-
vestments in fixed assets. The least productive sectors, like agriculture 
and fishing and education sectors were the least attractive sectors for 
foreign investments as well (see the Figure 29). These findings are not 
surprising, as FDI is mainly made in capital intensive sectors that are 
distinguished by high productivity.

In addition, it is worth noting 
that the sectors which are the 
most attractive for foreign 
investors experienced the 
largest productivity gains in 
the last 10 years.

For example, top 3 fastest improving sectors in terms of productivity: 
construction, industry and real estate, where value added per employed 
person improved by 153, 109 and 97 thousand lari respectively, again 
has been the most active destinations for foreign direct investment. 
However, despite the fact that there is a strong correlation between FDI 
and sectorial productivity (and productivity gain), it is hard to conclude 
that there is causal relationship between these variables and what is 
the direction of causality.

While theoretically FDI 
have the positive effect on 
employment, in the case 
of Georgia the relationship 
between them is ambiguous.

A high share of self-employed people in total employment in the coun-
try complicates this analysis even further. Theoretically, high FDI inflow 
causes moving self-employed people to formal employment in the cor-
responding sectors and this finding is confirmed by data. The share of 
self-employment in total employment varied between 66.2 percent 
(2004) to the 54.2 percent (1999), starting a gradual decline in the re-
cent years to 57.3 percent in 2016. Yet, there are other objective factors 
that also incentivize people to involve into to the formal employment 
– domestic investment, decreasing tax burden, tax system simplifica-
tion, and negative net migration that puts this theoretical foundation 
into question. A simple correlation test between employment and FDI, 
which includes only officially hired people showed that the linkage be-
tween these two variables is statistically not significant and even neg-
ative in some economic sectors. However, there is a strong positive 
correlation between employment in different sectors and investments 
in fixed assets almost for the all of sectors. In addition, there is a weak 
positive correlation between investment in fixed assets and FDI, and 
construction sector remains the only sector where these two variables 
are closely linked to each other (see the table 8). From this very simplis-
tic comparison, one can conclude that without knowing details about 
every specific FDI inflow or outflow, FDI (as represented by BOP statis-
tics) might lead to the misleading interpretations.