flexibility, which eliminated the parallel premium and 
implicit FX subsidy, along with other fiscal reforms 
– such as rationalizing tax expenditures, introducing 
withholding VAT for key sectors, and improving the 
management of revenue remittances by government 
agencies – sharply increased Federation revenues from 
5.5 percent of GDP in H1 2023 to 8.7 percent in H1 
2024. Monetary policy has also tightened to rein in 
inflation, with a combined 850 basis point monetary 
policy rate (MPR) hike to 27.25 percent since February 
2024, as well as other measures to improve monetary 
policy transmission and lift market interest rates. 
Crucially for Nigeria’s economic turnaround, the fiscal 
and monetary authorities have also moved decisively to 
restore fiscal discipline by ending deficit monetization 
and refocusing the central bank on its price and financial 
sector stability mandate.

Nigeria’s improved economic policies 
have resulted in difficult adjustments and 
are starting to show results

Previous 
distortionary 
and 
unsustainable 
macroeconomic policies were hindering Nigeria 
from achieving its immense potential. Monetary and 
foreign exchange (FX) policies were increasingly opaque, 
distortive, and inconsistent with maintaining price 
stability, including multiple managed and overvalued 
official exchange rates. Fiscal revenues were hampered 
by one of the lowest tax-to-GDP ratios globally (3.2 
percent of GDP in 2022), whilst a large share of the 
Federation’s oil revenues was absorbed by a costly, 
regressive, and opaque gasoline subsidy. The overvalued 
official exchange rate and emergence of a large parallel 
FX market premium, which constituted an implicit FX 
subsidy, also imposed large revenue losses, as well as 
weighing on confidence, investment, and growth. The 
combined fiscal cost of the PMS and FX subsidies was 
enormous. In 2022, the estimated cost was 5.2 percent of 
GDP, equivalent to about three-quarters of the revenues 
that flowed to the Federation. The resultant large and 
growing fiscal deficits were increasingly financed by 
deficit monetization through Ways and Means Advances 
from the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), the stock of 
which increased to 11.6 percent of GDP by end-2022. 
The economy inevitably fell into a downward spiral of 
eroding confidence, surging inflation, de facto currency 
depreciation manifesting through a widening FX 
premium, declining official reserves, burgeoning debt, 
weak growth, and increasing poverty and social fragility.

The new policy direction is essential, but in the 
short-term it has added to already intense pressures 
on households and firms. The policy changes, whilst 
necessary and urgent to avert an outright fiscal crisis 
and put Nigeria on a better development path, were 
undertaken from an already fragile economic position, 
and against the backdrop of political transition, high 
inflation, and supply-side shocks (especially of food 
staples), and other heightened uncertainties. The removal 
of the PMS subsidy led to an unprecedented tripling 
of retail gasoline prices in 2023, which was followed 
by another approximately 50 percent increase in 2024 
through early October. The exchange rate unification 
and subsequent depreciation also had substantial knock-
on effects on general price levels. Nigerians across the 
income spectrum have been affected, from those at the 
bottom facing soaring food prices, to those running 
generators, to those at the top with cars. Monetary 
policy tightening has also aggravated an already high-
interest rate environment for businesses, particularly 
micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). With so 
many constituencies having benefited from the previous 
approach, especially the elite, there has been intense 
political pressure to regress to the previous policies, 
despite their unsustainable cost and the fact that they

unfairly benefited mainly a lucky few at the expense of 
ordinary Nigerians, holding Nigeria’s economy back, 
misdirecting scarce fiscal resources, and preventing 
poverty reduction.

improving, with the Federal Government's fiscal deficit 
narrowing from 6.2 percent of GDP in H1 2023 to 4.4 
percent in H1 2024, helping to mitigate debt-related 
risks, re-anchor inflation expectations, and restore 
confidence in the economy. FX reserves – a buffer against 
external shocks – have risen from US$32.9 billion at 
the end of 2023 to more than US$38.5 billion by early 
October 2024. The real exchange rate has dropped to 
historical lows, correcting the previous overvaluation of 
the official rate, and enhancing Nigeria's international 
competitiveness, providing an historic opportunity for 
Nigerian products and services to compete with imports 
and tap export market opportunities.

Although it is still early, positive results from the 
improved policies are starting to show (Figure O.1.). 
Output growth has remained modest overall, but inched 
higher through mid-2024 as oil sector output has 
stabilized and activity in some services has been robust. 
Inflation, though still high at 33.4 percent in July 2024 
on a year-on-year basis (yoy), fell for the first time in 
nineteen months, and edged lower again in August to 
32.2 percent. Whilst still fragile, the fiscal position is

The indications that the macroeconomic situation is 
improving are encouraging, providing oxygen to the 
economy and the necessary condition for growth to 
ignite, with the help of additional, complementary 
measures. Sustaining the new direction of policies will 
continue to open space for the takeoff in investment and 
jobs which Nigeria urgently needs, and which in turn 
will further reinforce the improvement in the external 
and fiscal positions. If they can be sustained, and 
complemented with measures to address long-standing 
structural constraints and spur investment, growth, and 
jobs, Nigerians will start seeing the benefits of the new 
direction in their daily lives.

on standard tools—i.e. MPR anchoring via open 
market operations and standing facilities—rather than 
prudential instruments, to improve policy transmission 
and ease financial repression. Strong coordination 
between monetary and fiscal policy, with the latter 
reducing borrowing pressures sufficiently, is necessary to 
rebuild confidence and reduce inflation.

Exchange rate policy should continue to be geared 
towards maintaining a unified, market-reflective 
exchange rate, whilst deepening the FX market. The 
CBN should continue efforts towards deepening the 
official FX market, including by facilitating formal 
remittances inflows, allowing international oil companies 
to fully concentrate their FX sales in the official market, 
restoring intermediated market access to bureaux 
de change, and refraining from ad-hoc FX auctions. 
Allowing market participants to trade FX with more 
flexibility across time would also contribute to deepening 
the FX market. In addition, continuously reaffirming 
the commitment to exchange rate flexibility, adopting a 
comprehensive, systematic, and transparent framework 
for CBN FX interventions, and building reserves, would 
contribute to anchoring exchange rate expectations to 
fundamentals, rather than to perceived targeted rate 
levels. Maintaining the single, market-reflective exchange 
rate is crucial to increase fiscal revenues (from oil and 
taxes on other export-related profits, customs, and VAT 
on imports), attract investment, build external reserves, 
and, in turn, set the conditions for investment and 
inclusive growth.

Sustaining and deepening reforms 
is essential to maximize gains, while 
intensifying support for the poorest 
households to cope with inflation, and 
expand opportunities

The monetary policy stance needs to remain tight 
until a sustained disinflation path is achieved, along 
with continued improvements in policy transmission. 
Maintaining a tight enough monetary policy stance 
is critical to keep market interest rates positive in 
real terms, temper FX demand, and lower inflation 
expectations. Furthermore, it is essential that the CBN’s 
commitment to not reverting to inflationary ways and 
means advances as in the recent past should be upheld. 
The CBN could clearly communicate that the recent 
amendment of the CBN Act to increase the limit from 
5 to 10 percent of previous year’s revenue does not imply 
a renewed recourse to ways and means. Rather, the legal 
requirement to retire outstanding balances at the end of 
each year and use this facility only for limited, temporary 
liquidity mismatches remains. Ways and means balances 
(principal and interest) should be systematically 
reported on with less of a time lag. Monetary policy 
implementation should also rely progressively more

On the fiscal front, focus on four key areas can 
reduce debt risks and create more space for 
development and pro-poor spending. First, and 
building on progress toward market-reflective pricing, 
it is essential to address the remaining implicit PMS 
subsidy by allowing retail prices to adjust periodically 
in line with market fundamentals (i.e., exchange rates 
and international prices). This would open the PMS 
market to competition and boost Federation revenues. 
Second, continued progress on non-oil revenue growth 
through tax reforms and improved administration is

vital; Nigeria's tax revenues of 3.8 percent of GDP in 
2023 remain extremely low by international standards. 
Third, reducing governance costs and redirecting 
inefficient spending toward more targeted, pro-growth, 
and pro-poor initiatives is crucial for supporting the 
poor, boosting long-term growth, and effectively 
communicating burden-sharing to the population. 
Fourth, ensuring realistic budgets and avoiding the re-
emergence of unbudgeted financing needs is necessary 
to prevent a return to ways and means financing, which 
should be reserved for short-term liquidity support and 
kept within stipulated legal limits.

benefits to households, including quick scaling up of 
programs in response to shocks; and (iii) accelerating 
the roll-out of social protection measures, including 
the direct benefits transfer program, to counteract 
purchasing power losses and hardships.

Macroeconomic stabilization creates a new platform 
and historic opportunity to ignite growth and job 
creation, if supplemented by progress on addressing 
long-standing structural constraints. Reducing trade 
barriers can play a key role in reducing prices and 
boosting Nigeria’s competitiveness. The removal of the 
FX ban on 43 product lines, the temporary removal 
of tariffs on food products, and the re-launch of the 
single window are positive initial steps. Alongside the 
implementation of these measures, further actions 
should remove import bans on food and cleaning 
products, apparel, and fertilizers, as well as and align 
tariffs with the ECOWAS Common External Tariffs 
(CET). Longer-term efforts on external trade should 
focus on tariff transparency, reducing non-tariff barriers, 
and improving trade facilitation through better risk 
management and audits. Improving competition policy 
and its enforcement would bolster the benefits of lower 
import barriers in reducing prices and fostering growth, 
as would increasing access to finance to productive firms. 
Transport and digital infrastructure investments should 
increase, in partnership with the private sector, to better 
integrate the domestic market, and allow businesses 
to expand. Increasing access to reliable power supply 
and reducing insecurity, from banditry to informal 
checkpoints along trade corridors, are also essential 
to boost job creation. Sustained investments and 
institutional strengthening would enhance state capacity 
to deliver health and education to the population, 
especially in poorer regions.

In parallel with stabilizing the macroeconomy, it 
is critical to protect the poor and the economically 
insecure 
by 
enhancing 
the 
social 
protection 
framework. So far, a social registry has been developed, 
covering over 18 million households (making it one 
of the largest in the world), and time-bound, shock 
responsive, direct benefit transfers of NGN 25,000 
are being rolled out to 15 million households (directly 
benefiting over 60 million Nigerians) for a period of 
3 months. The authenticity of the individuals is being 
validated through the National Identification Number 
(NIN) or the Bank Verification Number (BVN) before 
making payments directly into recipient bank accounts. 
To date, 4.4 million households have received at least 
one payment tranche and 0.8 million have received a 
second tranche. While the NIN/BVN requirements help 
authenticate individuals and ensure that the payments 
go to the authenticated individual, the low coverage of 
NIN/BVN among the poor and vulnerable population 
has adversely impacted the pace of the rollout of the 
direct benefit transfers. There is an urgent and critical 
need to ensure that the poor and vulnerable population 
from the social registries are quickly enrolled into the 
NIN/BVN, so that the direct benefit transfers can reach 
them. Over the medium term, there is a pressing need to 
accelerate and enhance social protection by: (i) ensuring 
that the social registry continues to increase in coverage 
and becomes dynamic to reflect the current status of 
the households; (ii) ensuring that the social protection 
system has a wide coverage and provides adequate

Productive jobs are essential for poverty 
reduction

Without jobs, poor Nigerians will not be able to 
escape poverty. Poverty is high and rising in Nigeria.

More than half of the population lives in poverty1. This 
partly reflects the modest overall pace of economic 
growth, which is insufficient to compensate for the 
erosion of purchasing power brought about by inflation. 
Yet, it also reflects the non-inclusive structure of growth: 
even when GDP was expanding more rapidly in the 
early 2010s, richer households benefited more. Jobs hold 
the key to sharing the proceeds of growth. Since Nigeria 
has a young and growing population, the jobs that can 
harness the country’s potential “demographic dividend” 
are needed now.

the skills of Nigeria’s workers match the current needs of 
the labor market.

Short- and medium-run policies to boost productivity 
in farm and non-farm household enterprises would 
provide relief while higher-paying jobs are not 
available, and could support some to succeed and 
grow. Most farm and non-farm household enterprises 
are currently small scale, rarely employing individuals 
from outside the household. Supporting these household 
enterprises relies on many of the foundational policies, 
especially the bedrock of basic infrastructure, but also 
goes beyond these. Like other firms, they need to be 
able to access the inputs they require – including tools, 
fertilizer, and productive, climate-resilient crop varieties 
for farmers – for which improved access to finance may 
also help. In addition, they need to reach output markets 
to foster commercialization and productivity growth.

However, employment on its own is not enough to lift 
people out of poverty: Nigeria needs productive jobs, 
but these are scarce. In Nigeria, as in many countries, 
high employment and high poverty coexist. In-work 
poverty is common as many jobs do not generate 
earnings that are high enough to escape poverty. Low 
incomes are symptomatic of low productivity jobs. 
Nigeria’s labor market is changing – with employment 
shifting from agriculture to services – but these changes 
are not increasing overall productivity and living 
standards, because many of the new service-sector 
jobs are in low-productivity sub-sectors like retail and 
wholesale trade.

Policy initiatives for women and youth can improve 
the 
labor 
market’s 
poverty-reducing 
potential. 
Initiatives that cover mostly highly-formalized wage 
workers – including policies on public sector jobs 
and minimum wage legislation – only reach a small 
segment of Nigeria’s poor and economically insecure 
population directly, as they do not have access to these 
types of jobs. Such policies may also be fiscally costly, 
given the large share of formal public sector workers. 
Focusing on excluded workers offers a clearer avenue for 
reducing poverty. Women and youth have lower access 
to productive jobs than the rest of the population, so 
supporting better labor market outcomes for them is 
key. Gender-sensitive policies include: (1) keeping girls 
in school, (2) improving provision of childcare, and 
(3) overcoming restrictive gender norms that prevent 
women participating in the labor market through 
economic empowerment interventions combined with 
trainings and community sensitization. For Nigeria’s vast 
youth population, policies to (1) support skills and job 
matching, (2) manage external migration including by 
helping young emigrants reach destination countries that

Sustained poverty reduction depends on creating 
wage jobs through macro-fiscal stability, growth, 
and private sector development, complemented by 
building human capital. Wage jobs are associated with 
escaping poverty, but they remain rare: just 13.6 percent 
of employed Nigerians are primarily engaged in wage 
work. Addressing the urgent need for more wage jobs 
depends on the foundations of macro-fiscal stability 
and growth. This entails establishing the conditions 
for private sector development – boosting market 
access, increasing openness to trade, and promoting 
a better business environment can all help. This must 
be complemented by other long-run efforts to reduce 
poverty, including building human capital and ensuring

seek their skills, and (3) provide fallback employment – 
including by ensuring that public investments consider

job creation potential – can help improve access to 
productive jobs.

• Maintain positive real ex-ante policy rates.
• Ensure policy rates place a floor under short-term 
market interest rates.
• Rely more on policy rates and standard instruments 
(MPR anchoring, via OMOs and SDF/SLF), rather 
than on prudential instruments (e.g., CRR).

Maintain tight monetary policy to lower 
inflation

• Have realistic budgets to avoid unbudgeted financing 
requirements.
• Increase the timeliness and detail level of information 
on the Ways & Means Advances balance and interest 
paid on it, and on the CBN’s overall balance sheet.

Avoid resorting to deficit monetization, 
including continuing to avoid Ways & 
Means Advances

Improve balance sheet transparency
• Publish the 2023 audited financial statements. 
• Provide details on net FX reserves.

• Adopt a plan to fully achieve and maintain a cost-
reflective PMS price.
• Include any implicit PMS subsidy in the budget.

• Reform the VAT regime and rationalize tax 
expenditures.
• Improve tax administration by adopting an e-invicing 
system and strengthening tax audits.

• Improve the reporting of oil revenues to FAAC.
• Conduct an audit to reconcile what is owed by the 
NNPC to the Federation, and vice versa.

Phase out the FX subsidy
• Ensure that all FX-related transactions occur at the 
market-determined exchange rate.

• Cut wasteful expenditures that are not essential, 
such as purchase of vehicles, external training, etc.
• Reduce the cost of collection of MDAs/GOEs.

Maintain a unified, market-reflective 
exchange rate

• Communicate and implement a comprehensive, 
systematic framework for CBN FX interventions to 
provide clarity to market participants as to when and 
how CBN may buy or sell FX. 
• Focus on transparently supporting market liquidity 
and price discovery.

Concentrate FX transactions in the 
official market

• Take measures to build liquidity in the NAFEM, 
including by easing remaining restrictions, and 
channeling oil-related inflows to the market.

Reduce trade restrictions that increase 
prices and poverty

• Lift import bans.
• Eliminate tariff deviations from ECOWAS CET.
• Adopt and implement a compliance trade program.

(E) PROVIDE URGENT RELIEF TO THE POPULATION

Scale-up and provide relief to the 
population

• Accelerate the roll out of targeted cash transfers.
• Allocate savings from PMS subsidy removal to 
sustainably expand cash transfers and other well-
targeted support.

Recent economic developments and 
the outlook for Nigeria

Nigeria's economic landscape has been impacted by 
past policy missteps and external shocks, weighing 
on growth, and resulting in increased poverty. 
Recognizing the urgent need for change, the government 
has embarked on bold but challenging macroeconomic 
reforms since mid-2023 to rein in inflation, normalize 
access to foreign exchange, and remove fiscally 
unsustainable, regressive, and distortionary subsidies. 
Nigerians have experienced intensifying hardship, as the 
needed price and exchange rate adjustments have added 
to cost of living pressures, whilst confidence, investment, 
jobs and income growth, take time to gain traction on 
the back of improved policies and macroeconomic 
stability. Sustaining and deepening the reforms to 
maximize the gains from the difficult steps already taken, 
while also intensifying support for poor and vulnerable 
households to cope, offers a path forward.

structural reforms can further unwind the long-standing 
constraints to private sector development and unleash 
faster growth. Against the backdrop of large exchange 
rate and price increases in Nigeria and other economies 
(such as Egypt), there is a need to exercise caution when 
estimating the size of the Nigerian economy relative to 
other economies, and such estimates should not be based 
on nominal US dollar GDP (Box 1.1).

Amidst ongoing reforms, economic growth has 
remained moderate, but resilient, driven by the 
service sector (Figure 1.1 and Figure 1.2). GDP growth 
slowed to 2.9 percent in 2023 partly due to weak crude 
oil production, a damaging currency demonetization 
in the first quarter, and the spillovers from the 2022 
floods. In per capita terms, real GDP growth averaged 
0.7 percent between 2021-2023, still not reaching the 
pre-pandemic income level. The economy grew by 2.9 
percent in H1 2024 year-on-year (yoy), 0.5 percentage 
points (pp) higher than H1 2023. Quarterly growth 
also picked up, from 2.8 percent yoy in Q1 2024 to 
3.0 percent in Q2 2024. The services sector, especially 
financial and telecommunication services, continued to 
be the major driver of growth in the first half of 2024. 
Yet, a number of factors weighed on growth, including 
still subdued agricultural and manufacturing output. 
Overall, regarding the major economic sectors:

• Agriculture: Agricultural output growth fell to 0.8 
percent yoy in H1 2024. The sluggish growth largely 
resulted from contractions in livestock production and 
a slowdown in crop production. The sector continues 
to be affected by unfavorable climatic conditions (low 
rainfall in 2023 farming season and heatwaves in Q1 
2024), insecurity in farming communities, and higher 
costs of imported farm inputs − such as fertilizer and 
other agrochemicals following the naira depreciation.

1.1. Economic growth has been 
resilient, albeit only moderate

The conditions for economic growth have improved 
with recent macroeconomic reforms. Monetary 
policy tightening and improved policy coherence, 
reforms to the FX market that resulted in a market-
reflective exchange rate, and the start of a revenue-
based fiscal adjustment, have improved macroeconomic 
conditions for businesses to expand and create jobs. 
Sustaining these reforms and building on them with

• Non-oil industry: The non-oil industrial growth 
decelerated from 2.9 percent in H1 2023 to 0.8 
percent in H1 2024. The growth of the manufacturing 
sector remained weak at 1.4 percent, as the sector faced 
rising cost pressures from FX depreciation, increased

interest rates, and higher PMS prices, along with 
ongoing structural challenges like power shortages and 
a difficult business environment. The food and beverage 
and cement sub-industries were the main drivers of 
growth, while coal mining, quarrying, minerals, oil 
refining, textiles, apparel, and footwear all contracted. 
Construction contracted by 0.8 percent yoy in H1 2024, 
marking its first decline since the 2020 recession.

• Services: The services sector remained the main 
driver of GDP growth, expanding by 4.1 percent yoy 
in H1 2024. Financial services grew by 31.9 percent 
yoy, the fastest in over a decade, driven by FX gains from 
naira depreciation and higher interest income due to 
wider spreads from rising market rates. Information and 
communication services, the second largest contributor, 
grew by 5.7 percent, supported by ongoing expansion 
in voice and data services. However, transportation and 
storage services contracted by 3.9 percent, while trade 
services growth remained weak at 1.0 percent, below H1 
average of 2.5 percent between 2011-19.

• Oil: The oil sector growth accelerated from a 
contraction of 8.7 percent in H1 2023 to a growth 
of 7.8 percent in H1 2024. The sector benefited 
from a moderate increase in crude oil and condensates 
production which grew by 2.9 percent in H1 2024 to 1.5 
mbpd. Despite the increase in average crude production, 
it remains below the Federal Government's 2024 Budget

2018/19 and 2024. Several shocks have contributed to 
this major increase and changing profile of the poor: the 
COVID-19 recession, natural disasters such as flooding, 
growing insecurity, the high cost of the demonetization 
policy in Q1 2023, high inflation, and low economic 
growth. Previous domestic policy missteps compounded 
the effects of the shocks, particularly rising inflation, 
eroding the purchasing power, especially of urban

Multiple shocks in a context of high economic 
insecurity have deepened and broadened poverty, with 
over 115 million Nigerians estimated to have been 
poor in 2023. Since 2018/19, an additional nearly 35 
million people have fallen into poverty, so that more 
than half of Nigerians (51.1 percent of the population 
in 2023) are now estimated to live in poverty. While 
the majority of the poor people (61.9 percent) still 
live in rural areas, poverty has become an increasingly 
urban plight, with the share of urban population living 
in poverty rising from 18.0 to 31.3 percent between

households, pushing many into poverty. The government is ramping up the cash transfer programs to support 
economically insecure households to help weather the crisis.

Figure B1.2 shows that MER-based estimates of Nigeria’s share of GDP for Africa fell from around 16% 
to under 13% between 2021 and 2023, and both Egypt and South Africa have larger GDP shares under 
this measure in 2023. This is related to the sharp increase in the official exchange rate between the Nigerian 
naira (NGN) and US dollar (USD). During this period, the official USD/NGN exchange rate rose from 
399.41 to 646.13 (a 38% depreciation of the naira). Conversely, PPP-based estimates of GDP show Nigeria’s 
output accounted for around 15% of the regional total for all three years and was consistently the second-
largest economy in Africa (behind Egypt) during the observed period.

GDP estimates for 2024 are scheduled to become available in July 2025 through the World Bank 
World Development Indicators (WDI). So far in 2024, Africa largest economies, including Egypt and 
Nigeria, experienced further, large increases in their nominal exchange rates against the US dollar as well as 
in domestic prices due to the high inflation. Furthermore, in Nigeria, the gap between the official and parallel 
market exchange rates closed in February 2024, facilitating price discovery and foreign exchange (FX) supply, 
which is expected to be positive for trade, investment, and growth.

Overall, comparing and ranking the value of economic activity amongst African economies against 
a volatile price backdrop should be done cautiously. Such comparisons should not be based on official 
MERs.

1.2. Monetary policy has improved 
markedly, and inflation has begun 
to fall

sapping confidence in the naira and pushing up inflation. 
As a result, inflation was surging, even before the series of 
reforms which began in mid-2023, reaching 22.4 percent 
yoy in May 2023.

A series of macroeconomic policy missteps in 2015-
2023 contributed to an inflation surge in Nigeria 
(Box 1.2). Up until 2014, headline inflation was broadly 
stable, in high single digits or low two digits, not so 
distant from the levels observed in other major emerging 
markets (Figure 1.3). From 2015, however, the CBN 
shifted its primary focus away from price stability – its 
core mandate – ostensibly towards growth objectives, 
by providing large amounts of credit to households 
and firms at subsidized rates, as well as prohibiting 
access to FX to import over 900 product lines. Large 
and unbudgeted fiscal deficits, as well as the costs 
associated with maintaining an overvalued exchange rate, 
increasingly subjugated monetary policy to financing 
fiscal deficits, including through deficit monetization 
through Ways and Means Advances. The money supply 
increased at a very rapid pace between 2015 and 2023,

Monetary policy effectiveness also weakened, as CBN 
started employing prudential and regulatory tools 
for monetary policy purposes. To stimulate credit 
provision, CBN imposed a minimum loan-to-deposit 
ratio to banks (instead of a prudential maximum) and 
restricted access to its standing facilities, where banks 
can obtain or park liquidity. Conversely, it imposed 
extraordinarily high cash reserve requirements (CRR) to 
mop up liquidity. High pressure for lending combined 
with constrained allocation options led to artificially low 
government borrowing costs and market rates, which lost 
the monetary policy rate (MPR) anchor (Figure 1.4).

Under its new leadership, the CBN has taken 
bold steps to reverse the harmful previous policy 
framework. Crucially, the CBN committed to stop

monetary financing of the fiscal deficit (see fiscal 
developments section) and halted new development 
finance interventions, which were inconsistent with its 
price stability mandate. The monetary policy stance has 
also been significantly tightened. The newly constituted 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) raised the MPR 
by a combined 850 basis points to 27.25 percent 
between January and September 2024 and improved the 
flexibility and level playing field of the CRR, although 
it remains exceptionally high at 50 percent to drain 
domestic liquidity. Importantly, the CBN has followed 
through on the MPC’s decisions with large open market 
operations (OMOs) at rates close to the MPR. In the 
first eight months of 2024, OMOs amounted to over 
NGN 6.6 trillion, 30 percent more than in the three 
previous full years combined. The monetary policy 
stance was tightened further by increasing the standing 
deposit facility rate from -300 bps around MPR to -100 
bps, while the standing facility rate increased to MPR 
+500 bps. Consequently, market rates have been re-
anchoring to the MPR recently (Figure 1.4). The new 
monetary policy framework has also attracted FX inflows 
and drained naira liquidity, contributing to solidify the 
FX reform (see external sector developments below).

Although inflation started to decline, the battle is far 
from over. After reaching a 28-year high of 34.2 percent 
year-on-year (yoy) in June 2024, headline inflation 
began to decline in July, falling further to 32.15 percent 
in August 2024. This was supported by base effects and a 
slowdown in the month-to-month (mom) pace of price 
increases since March due to tightened monetary policy. 
However, while mom inflation peaked in February 
2024, it remains elevated, running at an annualized pace 
of about 27 percent (Figure 1.5). Higher food prices 
are particularly in focus, contributing 60 percent of the 
consumer price index increase in the 12 months leading 
to August 2024, compared to the 52 percent weight of 
food in the CPI basket (Figure 1.6). The surge in food 
prices is attributed to significant increases in key staples 
such as rice, garri, bread and wheat, which have more 
than doubled as of August 2024.

Box 1.2. Quantifying long-term drivers of inflation 
 
Inflation in Nigeria has been largely determined by macroeconomic fundamentals. Broad money supply 
grew 13 percent on average in 2018-2023, significantly above that of real GDP, 1.8 percent. This expansion 
was largely driven by monetization of fiscal deficits through Ways and Means, which reached 11.5 percent of 
GDP in May 2023, right before being securitized; up from 4.2 percent back in 2018. The relentless rise in 
import prices and the loss of credibility of CBN’s focus on price stability pushed up inflation expectations. 
Increased naira liquidity was met by a fall in FX inflows, specially from oil exports and foreign investors, 
which led to nominal exchange rate depreciation pressures. As the official exchange rate was increasingly and 
artificially overvalued, supply of FX at official rates dried up. Demand for FX was displaced to the parallel 
market and the more market-reflective parallel exchange rate soared, feeding into inflation. Changes in input 
costs, notably oil, also contributed to higher inflation

An error correction inflation model allows to quantify the effects of the main inflation drivers. While 
rising structural constraints and price shocks have impacted inflation, the preferred estimates indicate that the 
main long-term drivers of inflation until 2023 were money supply growth, inflation expectations – anchored 
on persistently high past inflation – exchange rate depreciation, and input costs, in particular oil (Figure 
B1.3). The estimates point to a large effect of inertial inflation, highlighting the importance of a sufficiently 
persistent and tight monetary policy stance to re-anchor inflation expectations. Similarly, the contribution of 
exchange rate depreciations to headline inflation is sizeable, particularly in recent years. A 10 percent higher 
USD/NGN exchange rate is estimated to increase aggregate price levels by 2 percent (i.e., 20 percent pass-
through)4.

4 
Caveats to this estimation include endogeneity concerns that could arise from possible omitted variables and simultaneity. Time series 
on Nigeria are quite short, so a balance must be struck between comprehensiveness and statistical properties when estimating the main 
drivers of inflation. Similarly, reverse causality could bias estimators, for instance, if the exchange rate affects inflation, but the latter also 
affects the former. The parsimonious model, however, restricts the scope for biases in the estimators.

1.3. Reforms have successfully 
achieved 
a 
unified, 
market-
reflective exchange rate and the 
external position is improving

demand restrictions and declining FX supply through 
the official channels pushed businesses and households 
into the parallel market to meet their FX requirements 
and generated arbitrage and rent-seeking opportunities. 
Prior to the reforms, as of June 2023, the parallel 
market-NAFEX premium was 60 percent, indicating a 
significant overvaluation of the NAFEX rate.

Major reforms achieved a market-
reflective exchange rate in the official FX 
market

Far-reaching 
FX 
policy 
reforms 
have 
been 
implemented since June 2023, culminating in a 
market-reflective official FX market. In June 2023, 
the CBN unified all the FX windows into the Nigerian 
Autonomous Foreign Exchange Market (NAFEM) 
and initiated the adoption of a willing buyer-willing 
seller principle for FX trades. Further major changes 
in regulations at the end of January 2024 helped re-
establish a functioning official FX market; and the official 
brokerage, FMDQ, implemented a new spot exchange

The previous exchange rate policy was opaque and 
imposed huge costs on the economy. The official 
rate – the Nigerian Autonomous Foreign Exchange 
Fixing (NAFEX), determined at the Investors’ and 
Exporters’ (I&E) window – was tightly managed by the 
CBN due to moral suasion and did not reflect market 
fundamentals. The FX market lacked a clear and 
predictable price discovery mechanism due to the use 
of multiple FX windows to serve various purposes. FX

rate daily fixing methodology, which excludes outlier 
transacted prices. The CBN increased enforcement 
against practices of underreporting exchange rates 
used in FX trades, which had evolved in the market in 
response to the previous policy regime. It also lifted caps 
on exchange rate spreads that were in place for some 
market participants and cleared a backlog in FX claims of 
about US$4.4 billion that were assessed to be legitimate. 
In addition, CBN stopped moral suasion which had 
previously sought to keep the official rate managed at a 
certain level. As a result, the official exchange rate, and 
the minimum and maximum intraday traded rates, 
have all converged around the market rate, eliminating 
the parallel premium. An interbank FX market has also 
begun to emerge, contributing to a less volatile spot 
exchange rate, along with the significant monetary policy 
tightening which began in February 2024. The NAFEM 
has been attracting progressively more FX transactions.

The depreciation of the nominal exchange rate 
corrected the previous overvaluation of the naira and 
opens space for domestic production, including for 
export markets. The real exchange rate, relative to the 
US dollar, was 45 percent lower by June 2024 than the 
average rate of 2020, reaching historical lows. The very 
large nominal adjustment of the exchange rate more than 
compensates for recent inflation differentials between 
Nigeria and the US, making the US dollar price of the 
naira in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) terms the lowest it 
has been since at least the early 2000s. By making the FX-
denominated price of Nigerian products much cheaper, 
the exchange rate enhances Nigeria's international 
competitiveness and export potential, as well as creating 
space for domestic producers to compete with imports,

Figure 1.8. The real exchange rate has staged a 
large adjustment

Figure 1.7. FX reforms closed the FX premium and 
more than doubled turnover

if accompanied by major structural reforms to lower the 
high costs of production.

covering the years 2015 to 2022. Additionally, the CBN 
resumed publishing several key reports and analyses, 
which had been halted since 2020. These include details 
of FX interventions in the official market, the Purchasing 
Manager Index report5, the Business Expectations 
Survey report6, and the Inflation Expectation Survey 
report7. Building on these significant improvements in

The CBN has also made strides in improving 
transparency and communication, but further effort is 
required. In August 2023, for the first time since 2014, 
the CBN published its audited financial statements,

Figure 1.9. The exchange rate depreciation has 
compressed imports…

transparency, it is crucial for the CBN to publish the 
2023 audited financial statements and provide details 
on net FX reserves. Together, these actions would 
further strengthen transparency and credibility, which 
are essential for attracting investment and maintaining 
economic stability.

Larger current and financial account 
surpluses are strengthening the external 
position

The current account balance (CAB) moved further 
into surplus in 2023, driven by lower imports. The 
CAB increased 73 percent to US$6bn, as goods imports 
decreased more pronouncedly following the exchange 
rate depreciation—though the trade balance was still 
negative—and remittances remained high at 22.5 billion 
US dollars, amongst the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa 
(SSA). While oil production increased, oil exports fell 
in US dollar terms. This trend continued into the first 
half of 2024, when the CAB further to a surplus of 
US$8.5bn, the highest mid-year balance since 2014, as 
the trade deficit halved (yoy) and remittances inflows 
increased 7 percent (yoy).

Figure 1.10. The exchange rate depreciation has 
compressed imports…

The financial account surplus saw a large jump on 
the back of increased foreign portfolio investments 
(FPI), FDI, and other investment flows on net bases. 
The FAB increased markedly from 1.4 percent of GDP 
in 2022 to 4.7 percent of GDP in 2023 as net FDI 
moved from a negative position in 2022 into positive 
territory and net FPI surged by 74 percent. As of the 
first half of 2024, the FAB was lower compared to the 
same period in 2023, due to negative net FDI and other 
investment flows. However, net FPI inflows increased 
in H1 2024 (yoy), in response to exchange rate reforms 
(which made the domestic currency more reflective of 
market fundamentals) and higher domestic debt security 
yields. FPI flows will likely remain very sensitive to 
relative yields in other markets. FDI remains extremely 
low and is expected to increase only marginally in the 
full year 2024, as banks strive to attract foreign capital 
investments to meet new capitalization requirements

Figure 1.11. Net FDI and FPI have grown…
Figure 1.12. … but FDI to Nigeria remains very low 
compared to peer countries

announced in March 2024 (Figure 1.11). The FAB is 
projected to reach 4.6 percent of GDP in 2024.

errors and omissions figures are reported in Nigeria’s 
balance of payments (BoP) accounts, making changes 
in reserves the key metric to gauge how Nigeria’s overall 
BoP position is evolving. For example, reserves declined 
significantly in 2023 despite both the current and 
financial account balances being in surplus.

1.4. The financial sector remains 
resilient despite the impacts of 
recent shocks

deterioration in loan performance in terms of non-
performing loans (NPLs) in the first quarter of 2024, 
compared to the previous year, due to a challenging 
economic environment. The ratio of NPLs to total loans 
increased by 0.6 pp to 5.1 percent in Q1 2024 compared 
to Q1 2023 (Figure 1.15). This ratio is marginally 
above the prudential benchmark of 5.0 per cent. Banks,

Nigeria’s banking industry, which dominates the 
financial system, remains resilient despite external 
and domestic shocks. There has been a marginal

however, remain liquid with the industry liquidity ratio 
at 42.1 percent, well above the minimum regulatory 
benchmark of 30.0 percent, indicating an adequate 
liquidity cushion of the banks and their ability to meet 
with their obligations8. While profitability has slowly 
improved, it is still well below pre-COVID-19 levels, 
and is concentrated in larger banks, which benefit from 
lower funding costs and diversified income sources.

The banking system’s capital buffers have been eroded 
due to high inflation, significant depreciation of the 
naira, and the increase in the NPL ratio. The capital 
adequacy ratio of the banking system was 11.1 percent in 
Q1 2024, down from 14.2 percent in Q1 20239 (Figure 
1.16). As a pre-emptive measure to shore up financial 
resilience, the CBN on March 28, 2024, announced 
new minimum capital requirements for the banking 
sector, with a 24-month implementation window. 
Following approvals from the Nigeria Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC), several commercial banks 
with international licenses have already initiated capital 
increase procedures in the market through rights issues 
or public offers10.

remains low, and a large part of the increase was likely 
driven by high inflation and valuation effects. Strong 
earnings generated from the substantial 18 percent 
spread between deposit and lending rates along with 
FX revaluation gains (due to net long FX balance sheet 
positions) on Naira depreciation have supported banks' 
balance sheet growth. The large spread bolsters bank 
equity growth and can enhance banks' lending capacity, 
at least in the short term. However, such large spreads 
also reflect shortcomings in the competitive landscape.

Deepening Nigeria’s non-bank financial sector will 
also be vital to support higher investment and growth. 
Nigeria’s shallow and concentrated capital market – 
primarily focused on government securities and large 
corporates – poses a challenge to sustainable and inclusive 
growth. In terms of the public equity capital market, 
the ratio of market capitalization to GDP as at end of 
March 2024 is estimated at 24 percent11 compared to 
395 percent12 in South Africa. There are only 151 listed

companies on the Nigerian Exchange, compared to 312 
listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange as of July 
2024. In terms of debt capital, Federal Government 
(FGN) bonds account for about 85 percent13 of total 
debt capital market capitalization. Long-term finance 
and patient capital are especially needed to support 
the growth of MSMEs and help fund Nigeria’s large 
investment needs. Nigeria's pension industry has grown 
significantly over the last two decades, posting 20 percent 
average annual growth, with assets under management 
of about NGN 20 trillion as of April 2024. Recent 
legislation permits investment of up to 15 percent of 
total pension assets in infrastructure, but these assets are 
less than 1 percent of the portfolio, in part reflecting the 
scarcity of offerings.

implementation of withholding VAT at source by certain 
sectors. The unification of the FX rate led to a significant 
revenue windfall, as various FX-denominated revenues 
used to be transferred to the Federation at the official 
rate, which was 53 percent lower than the parallel rate 
in 2022 (Box 1.3). This resulted in an estimated NGN 
6.2 trillion (3 percent of GDP) in forgone tax revenues. 
The cost of these forgone revenues was even larger than 
the cost of the PMS subsidy, which had a fiscal cost 
of NGN 4.5 trillion in 2022 (2.2 percent of GDP). 
Additionally, dividends from parastatals rose by 0.3 
percentage points of GDP, following the December 2023 
reform to standardize and automate fund remittances to 
the treasury.

1.5. 
A 
revenue-driven 
fiscal 
consolidation is accompanying 
the monetary policy tightening

The fiscal position of the Federal Government 
improved in the first half of 2024, with the overall 
deficit narrowing to 4.7 percent of GDP, compared to 
6.2 percent of GDP in the same period last year. This 
improvement was primarily due to increased revenues, 
largely from the non-oil sector, following the removal 
of the implicit foreign exchange subsidy and revenue 
gains from reforms that enhanced the transparency and 
accountability of how government-owned enterprises 
(GOEs) and ministries, departments, and agencies 
(MDAs) remit their statutory revenues. Meanwhile, 
expenditures edged lower as a ratio of GDP.

Gains 
from 
FX 
unification, 
improved 
tax 
administration, and better management of revenue 
remittances 
from 
parastatals 
boosted 
non-oil 
revenues. Non-oil tax revenues to the Federation 
increased sharply by 1.7 percentage points of GDP 
in H1-2024 compared to H1-2023. This surge was 
driven by enhanced tax administration, including 
digital tax collection via the TaxProMax system and the

Prior to the full FX unification in February 2024, the presence of a parallel FX premium generated enormous 
fiscal costs, in the form of forgone revenues. This situation emerged because FX revenue inflows—such as oil 
and customs revenues, as well as a portion of domestic VAT and CIT which are paid in FX—were transferred 
to the treasury at the official exchange rate. However, due to the significant difference between the official 
and parallel market rates, the amount of naira-denominated revenue received by the Federation from FX-
linked revenues was significantly reduced. The unification of the FX rate has therefore eliminated the forgone 
revenues that previously benefited certain groups at the expense of the entire nation.
The implicit forgone revenues from the premium in the rate impacted five main revenue streams to the 
Federation:
1. 
Oil and gas revenues: Gross oil revenues are collected in FX, including crude oil and gas royalties, 
Petroleum Profit Tax (PPT), revenues from gas flaring, and other oil and gas revenue flows.
2. 
Import duties and excise duties on imported goods: Import duties and excises on imported goods are 
collected by the Nigeria Customs Service (NCS) in FX.
3. 
VAT revenues: VAT on imported goods and a significant share of VAT domestically are paid in FX. 
Combined, these two categories accounted for about 44.3 percent of net VAT revenues in 2021-2023
4. 
CIT revenues: Similar to VAT, about 40 percent of total CIT revenues collected by the Federation 
were paid in FX in 2021-2023.
5. 
GOE revenues: Several GOEs in Nigeria collect fees and levies in FX but remit revenues to the 
Federation in naira14. Unfortunately, data are not available for this category.
The estimated implicit forgone revenues from the FX premium were even larger than the PMS subsidy, 
underscoring the importance of maintaining a unified FX rate. In 2022, when the cost of the PMS subsidy 
reached NGN 4.5 trillion (2.2 percent of GDP), the revenues forgone that emerged due to the large parallel 
rate premium are estimated to have been NGN 6.2 trillion (3 percent of GDP): NGN 4.5 trillion of FX 
revenue forgone from gross oil revenues and NGN 1.7 trillion from the FX revenue forgone from non-oil 
tax revenues (Figure B1.4). These findings demonstrate that the FX unification reform not only addresses 
distortions in the FX market and the real economy but also has a substantial impact on restoring fiscal space. 
Therefore, maintaining the unified FX rate which Nigeria has achieved since February 2024 is essential from 
a fiscal perspective.
It should be noted that in addition to the large estimated fiscal benefits, the FX reform is also expected to 
benefit the economy by removing the large distortions the previous regime imposed, such as skewing the 
competitive landscape in favor of importers with preferential access to FX, making it more difficult and less 
profitable to export, and fueling rent-seeking and illicit activity.

Net oil revenues have increased, despite the implicit 
subsidy on premium motor spirit (PMS, gasoline), 
due to substantial FX-related gains. Gross oil revenues 
are estimated to have risen from NGN 3.8 trillion (3.7 
percent of GDP) in H1 2023 to about NGN 9.8 trillion 
(8 percent of GDP) in H1 2024. This surge in gross 
oil revenues has been driven largely by exchange rate 
effects: the unification of the FX rate, and the higher 
unified exchange rate. However, since August 2023, 
gasoline prices increased more slowly than import costs, 
which rose in local currency (naira) terms on account of 
naira depreciation. This was because NNPCL fixed the 
import value of gasoline in naira terms below the cost of 
imports in US dollar terms at the market exchange rate, 
effectively making it the de facto monopoly importer. 
The below-cost pricing of gasoline imposed a renewed 
implicit subsidy cost on the Federation, estimated 
at about NGN 5.9 trillion (2.1 percent of GDP) in 
2024, as NNPCL’s fiscal transfers have also been based

on a below-market naira exchange rate. In addition to 
the fiscal cost of the implicit fuel subsidy, the gains in 
gross revenues were also eroded by several deductions, 
including the increased amount of pledged crude oil 
being used by NNPCL to service loans it has acquired 
in recent years. Overall, net oil revenues (including gains 
from the FX rate unification) increased by 1.2 percentage 
points of GDP in H1-2024.

Revenue growth was accompanied by expenditures 
edging lower as a share of GDP, mainly due to 
under-execution of capital spending, which helped 
offset rising interest payments. In H1 2024, FGN 
expenditures amounted to 8.5 percent of GDP (NGN 
10.5 trillion), slightly lower as a share of GDP compared 
to the 9 percent (NGN 9.4 trillion) recorded in H1-2023. 
This relative stability in spending reflects two contrasting 
trends. On the one hand, capital expenditure (capex) 
declined by 1 pp of GDP, with actual spending reaching

only 40 percent of the prorated budgeted amount for 
the period. On the other hand, overhead costs rose 
by 0.2 pp of GDP, and other expenditures, including 
funds allocated to cover the shortfall in electricity 
tariffs and other initiatives such as the presidential 
metering program, increased by 0.5 pp. Personnel costs 
remained steady as a share of GDP during this period, 
which preceded the anticipated increase in the national 
minimum wage, which is expected to raise government

agreed to securitize the outstanding NGN 7.3 trillion 
stock of Ways and Means advances using market-based 
debt instruments. To this end, the DMO increased 
commercial borrowing and issued a cumulative NGN 
12.8 trillion in debt securities (FGN bonds and NTBs) 
as of early August to finance the fiscal deficit and repay 
the stock of Ways and Means advances, which dropped 
by NGN 3.7 trillion in Q1 2024, to stand at NGN 
4.4 trillion in March 2024. Relying on standard debt 
instruments not only eases inflationary pressures and is 
fundamental to restoring investor confidence, but also 
enhances debt transparency, improves debt management, 
and importantly, reduces borrowing costs, as the cost of 
Ways and Means financing is 3 pp higher than the MPR.

Nigeria has arrested the previous, rapid deterioration 
in its fiscal position and debt sustainability risks, and 
debt-related risk metrics are generally improving. 
Public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt is estimated 
to increase from 49.1 percent of GDP at the end of 
2023 to 50.8 percent in 2024, with the slight increase 
being mainly due to the FX valuation effect on external 
debt. The debt burden has increased sharply in recent 
years (it was 30.5 percent of GDP in 2019), but it is 
now on a declining trend helped by the major reforms, 
especially those begun in 2023. Although Nigeria’s stock 
of government debt remains moderate by international 
standards relative to the size of its economy, the very low 
revenue base means that the cost of servicing its debt 
quickly crowds out productive spending and makes the 
fiscal position vulnerable to debt-related risks. The debt 
service-to-revenue ratio exceeded 100 percent in 2022. 
Fortunately, this has declined alongside the improvement 
in the fiscal situation and is expected to be 57.1 percent 
in 2024. The improving debt trajectory is primarily 
driven by higher revenues due to ongoing reforms and 
the securitization of over 75 percent of the Ways and 
Means financing stock into a long-term instrument with 
a significantly lower interest rate. Nigeria’s external debt 
risk profile is helped by the fact that only 23 percent 
of the total PPG debt stock is in foreign currency, and 
mostly on concessional terms. Overall, the government’s 
debt remains sustainable, though it remains critical to

expenditures by approximately NGN 0.6-1 trillion 
annually.

In addition to the fiscal improvement, the authorities 
are following through on their commitment to stop 
monetizing the deficit. In a positive development, 
the Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF) and the CBN

further strengthen the fiscal position, and especially the 
revenue base, to reduce Nigeria’s vulnerability to adverse 
shocks and to sustainably free up resources to spend on 
development priorities.

global activity strengthened in early 2024, largely driven 
by solid U.S. economic expansion. Advanced economies 
are expected to grow by 1.5 percent, though with 
significant variation. Inflation has declined to the point 
where major central banks have begun to ease monetary 
policy, notably the U.S. Federal Reserve which lowered 
the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 4.75 percent 
in September 2024.

Despite improvements in the fiscal situation, lack 
of transparency in both the oil sector and the 2024 
amended budget creates fiscal uncertainties. Opaque 
governance at NNPCL undermines the transmission 
of oil revenues to the Federation. Non-transparent 
reporting to the Federation Account Allocation 
Committee (FAAC) makes it difficult for authorities to 
oversee NNPCL’s performance, calculate expected oil 
and gas revenues, and reconcile the difference between 
revenues received by the Federation and NNPCL’s 
total income. The reports submitted to FAAC are 
inconsistent and lack key information, such as pledged 
revenues, the tradeable value of crude oil, actual 
payments, and receipts from trade. Additionally, as 
noted in the Nigeria Public Finance Review (2022)15, 
quasi-fiscal activities—like in-kind crude oil revenues 
and direct cost deductions—further obscure financial 
reporting. Furthermore, unlike past practices when 
the Budget Office of the Federation (BOF) published 
details of approved budgets, the government has not 
released information regarding the NGN 6.2 trillion 
amendment to the 2024 Appropriation Act, creating 
some uncertainties about the future fiscal position.

Growth in emerging markets and developing 
economies (EMDEs) is expected to decline slightly 
from 4.2 percent in 2023 to 4 percent in 2024. 
However, excluding China, EMDE growth is projected 
to rise to 3.5 percent this year and firm to an average 
of 3.9 percent in 2025-26. The contribution from 
domestic demand in EMDEs is expected to weaken 
in 2024, mainly due to idiosyncratic factors in some 
large economies, but should strengthen over 2025-
26 as inflation eases and financial conditions improve. 
Policy rates have been cut in many EMDEs. In China, 
growth slowed in early 2024 and is expected to continue 
weakening due to lower consumption and subdued 
investment, with the ongoing property sector downturn 
weighing on real estate investment.

Risks to the global outlook remain tilted to the 
downside, despite some improvements since the 
beginning of this year. Heightened geopolitical 
tensions and intensifying conflicts could disrupt 
economic activity, including if a conflict-related shock 
to global oil supply pushes prices higher, counteracting 
the disinflation trend. Delays in disinflation could 
lead to postponed policy rate cuts, slowing growth. 
Additionally, weaker-than-expected growth in China, 
such as a prolonged property sector downturn, could 
have significant negative spillovers, especially for 
EMDE commodity exporters. Rising trade policy 
uncertainty and restrictions also pose risks to trade and 
economic activity. On the upside, faster-than-expected 
global disinflation, supported by stronger productivity 
growth, could enable central banks to cut rates more

1.6. 
Economic 
Outlook: 
The 
global economy is stabilizing and 
the prospects for Nigeria have 
improved, albeit still fragile

The global economy is stabilizing, following several 
years of overlapping negative shocks. Global growth 
is projected to stabilize at 2.6 percent this year, holding 
steady for the first time in three years (Table 1.1). Despite 
high financing costs, geopolitical tensions, and conflicts,

quickly, boosting growth. U.S. growth could also exceed 
expectations due to strong labor supply dynamics, driven 
by higher labor force participation and the absorption of 
working-age migrants.

industrial activity. Oil prices have fluctuated this year, 
trending substantially higher in April in the context of 
escalating tensions and conflict in the Middle East, but 
subsequently pulling back in recent weeks. Metals prices, 
excluding those of precious metals, are projected to stay 
well above pre-pandemic levels, as weaker metals demand 
associated with lower real estate investment in China is 
likely to be counterbalanced by firming global industrial 
demand and metals-intensive clean energy investments.

After a sharp decline between mid-2022 and mid-
2023, aggregate commodity prices have generally 
risen in 2024 (Figure 1.18). The increase was 
driven by tight supply conditions and signs of firmer

Nigeria’s outlook: recent reforms are 
expected to significantly improve 
macroeconomic conditions into the 
medium term, but the economy is still 
fragile

gains from closing the FX premium. Planned reforms 
to rationalize tax expenditures, improve VAT, enhance 
tax administration, and progress towards eliminating 
the gasoline subsidy, will further boost revenues. On 
the spending side, expenditures are expected to rise due 
to a higher wage bill from raising the minimum wage, 
increased capital investments in physical and human 
capital, and expanded social programs. Interest payments 
on debt are expected to decrease as global and domestic 
interest rates decline. Overall, revenue gains will exceed 
spending increases, reducing the primary deficit from 1.8 
percent of GDP in 2023 to 0.2 percent by 2027, and 
putting the debt-to-GDP ratio on a downward path.

Economic growth is expected to increase slightly in the 
projection period (through 2027), as macroeconomic 
reforms are consolidated. GDP is projected to grow by 
3.3 percent in 2024, rising to an annual average of 3.7 
percent over 2025-2027, continuing to be largely driven 
by the services sector, particularly financial services, 
telecommunications, and information services. While 
agricultural output is projected to improve over the 
medium term, enhancing agricultural productivity and 
strengthening security will be critical to mitigating food 
insecurity and reducing poverty, especially in key food-
producing regions. The non-oil industry sector is likely 
to experience modest yet steady growth, as manufacturers 
contend with ongoing structural challenges. Crude oil 
production is expected to improve slightly and reverse 
the sector’s negative growth trend since 2020. The 
production of domestic refined petroleum products by 
the new Dangote Petroleum Refinery is expected to push 
up oil refining output in the medium term.

The current account balance is expected to remain 
in surplus at an average of 3.1 percent of GDP from 
2025 to 2027, driven by a mix of increasing non-
oil exports, reduction in oil imports, and falling oil 
exports. Despite a slight increase in oil production in the 
medium term, crude oil export revenues are anticipated 
to decline due to lower global prices and an increase in 
crude sales in naira to domestic refineries, in addition 
to NNPC’s pledged crude oil commitments. However, 
rising non-oil exports, helped by a more competitive 
naira, are expected to partially offset the decline in oil 
exports. On the import side, refined oil imports are 
expected to decrease with new domestic fuel refining 
and the phase out of the gasoline subsidy, while non-oil 
imports are likely to remain constrained. Remittances are 
also expected to strengthen, driven by the unification of 
the FX rate.

Inflation will moderate in the base case. Headline 
inflation is anticipated to peak at an average annual 
rate of 31.7 percent in 2024, largely driven by the 
depreciation of the naira and increased gasoline prices, 
both of which have exerted upward pressure on prices 
in the short term. Yet, in the medium term, recent 
macroeconomic reforms and their continuation will help 
to reduce inflation, expected to fall to 14.3 percent by 
2027.

Nigeria continues to face economic challenges and 
there are substantial downside risks to the outlook. 
The population faces a prolonged rise in the cost of 
living driven by high inflation, especially for food 
products, outpacing nominal earnings growth. Adverse 
weather conditions may further limit agricultural 
output, increasing food prices and exacerbating 
poverty, particularly for low-income households. It is 
thus essential to ensure that social protection systems 
offer 
comprehensive 
coverage, 
adequate 
benefits, 
and flexibility to adapt to shocks. Ramping up social

The fiscal position is expected to improve if the 
Government remains committed to reforms to increase 
domestic revenues, control expenditures, and avoid 
any recourse to financing through Ways and Means 
Advances. Non-oil revenues are projected to continue 
rising, averaging 5.2 percent of GDP in 2025-2027, 
driven by higher dividends from parastatals and fiscal

protection efforts and improving the quality of spending 
on development priorities is vital to help households 
cope with the difficult economic situation. On the fiscal 
front, setbacks to further increasing non-oil revenues and 
safeguarding oil revenues could increase debt pressures. 
Not resorting to monetizing the deficit is crucial 
to efforts to rebuild confidence in the naira, reduce 
inflation, reduce debt costs, and keep the needed fiscal 
consolidation on track. The oil sector remains hindered 
by insecurity, limited investment, lack of transparency, 
and governance challenges.

extremely low by international standards. Similarly, 
oil revenues need to be safeguarded by permanently 
establishing market-reflective gasoline prices. In terms 
of meetings fiscal financing needs, the authorities are 
strongly committed to no longer monetizing the fiscal 
deficit through Ways & Means Advances; it is critical 
to rebuild confidence in the naira and reduce inflation 
expectations that this continues.

The macroeconomic reforms, if sustained and 
expanded, create a new platform to ignite growth and 
poverty reduction, also calling for deep structural 
reforms. 
Ongoing 
reforms 
boost 
international 
competitiveness, increase the attractiveness of Nigeria 
for domestic and foreign investments, and have started 
to reduce debt-related fiscal risks and reopen fiscal space. 
Yet, addressing longstanding and potentially binding 
constraints to growth are crucial for Nigeria to sustain 
stronger growth. This requires reducing trade barriers, 
improving trade facilitation, increasing access to reliable 
power supply, and improving the business environment. 
Transport infrastructure investments led by the private 
sector could integrate the domestic market, allowing 
businesses to reap economies of scale. Improving creative 
destruction forces for productivity growth rely on not 
only lowering import barriers, but also improving 
competition policy and its enforcement. Reducing 
insecurity, from banditry to informal checkpoints 
along trade corridors, is essential to increase production 
across sectors such as agriculture and the oil sector. 
Improving state capacity to deliver essential services to 
the population, especially in poorer regions, requires 
sustained investments and policy improvements, and 
can be a main driver for Nigeria’s development. The 
country urgently needs to improve its human capital to 
fully benefit from its growing and young population, as 
described further in Part 2.

1.7. Policy priorities: Staying the 
course on macro stabilization 
reforms, 
while 
intensifying 
support 
for 
the 
poorest 
households 
and 
expanding 
opportunities

Critical reforms are helping to stabilize Nigeria’s 
economy, and need continued efforts. The CBN 
should stay the course with tight monetary policy and 
maintaining the unified, market-reflective exchange 
rate policy. By building the relative appeal of the naira, 
maintaining sufficiently positive real ex-ante policy rates 
will help to drive down inflation. The monetary policy 
toolkit should also progressively rely more on standard 
rates-based instruments to improve policy transmission, 
building on the progress thus far to return to orthodox 
policy conducive to macroeconomic stability and long-
term financial sector development. The official FX 
market should be deepened, and foreign reserves rebuilt, 
as liquidity and access to FX is much more important 
than the nominal exchange rate. Substantial FX trade 
volume still occurs outside of NAFEM, as with recent 
retail FX auctions and sales to bureaux de change. 
The CBN could improve transparency by regularly 
publishing gross and net reserves at given dates. The 
unification and development of the FX market, higher 
foreign investment, and positive net trade balances can 
be leveraged to rebuild foreign reserves. On the fiscal 
front, increasing non-oil revenues is a continuing, urgent 
priority. Despite their recent increase, these remain

Although many structural reforms would involve 
longer and sustained efforts, some quick wins are 
readily available. Trade protectionism geared towards 
import substitution has failed to produce results. 
Instead, it constrains Nigerians’ access to higher

quality or cheaper goods, with direct adverse impacts 
on their purchasing power and national poverty levels 
(5.8 increase in prices for banned products). High 
effective rates are also estimated to increase input costs 
of Nigerian firms by 13.7 percent on average, curb 
healthy competition in the domestic market, and lower 
productivity. Recent measures to temporarily remove 
tariffs on food products and launch the National Single 
Window are welcome steps. These could be furthered 
by permanently lowering import tariffs on food and 
smoothing trade at the border with a green lane fast 
trade system for perishable and food products; lifting 
import bans on food and cleaning products, apparel, and 
fertilizers; reducing tariff deviations from the ECOWAS 
Common External Tariff on all products; and improving 
trade facilitation through better risk management and by 
implementing post clearance audits to reduce costs and 
time of cargo at the port and at border.

Whilst Nigeria’s macroeconomic stabilization efforts 
and boosting growth are urgent, there is also a need 
for strategies to create productive jobs and ensure that 
growth translates into poverty reduction. Chapter 2 of 
this report therefore delves into labor market outcomes 
in Nigeria and outlines pathways to help the country 
to create the more productive, higher-quality jobs, 
which are essential for long-term, inclusive growth. It 
also details policies that could be deployed to help farm 
and non-farm household enterprises access the inputs 
they need and expand the markets they serve. Such 
strategies offer a way to sustainably boost the economic 
opportunities and earnings of all Nigerians, including 
the vast majority who do not have access to formal, 
waged employment.

• Maintain positive real ex-ante policy rates.
• Ensure policy rates place a floor under short-term 
market interest rates.
• Rely more on policy rates and standard instruments 
(MPR anchoring, via OMOs and SDF/SLF), rather 
than on prudential instruments (e.g., CRR).

Maintain tight monetary policy to lower 
inflation

• Have realistic budgets to avoid unbudgeted financing 
requirements.
• Increase the timeliness and detail level of information 
on the Ways & Means Advances balance and interest 
paid on it, and on the CBN’s overall balance sheet.

Avoid resorting to deficit monetization, 
including continuing to avoid Ways & 
Means Advances

Improve balance sheet transparency
• Publish the 2023 audited financial statements. 
• Provide details on net FX reserves.

Eliminate the PMS subsidy
• Adopt a plan to fully achieve and maintain a cost-
reflective PMS price.
• Include any implicit PMS subsidy in the budget.

Strengthen non-oil revenues
• Reform the VAT regime and rationalize tax 
expenditures.
• Improve tax administration by adopting an 
e-invoicing system and strengthening tax audits.

Increase transparency of oil revenues
• Improve the reporting of oil revenues to FAAC.
• Conduct an audit to reconcile what is owed by the 
NNPC to the Federation, and vice versa.

Phase out the FX subsidy
• Ensure that all FX-related transactions occur at the 
market-determined exchange rate.

Reduce the cost of governance
• Cut wasteful expenditures that are not essential, 
such as purchase of vehicles, external training, etc.
• Reduce the cost of collection of MDAs/GOEs.

Maintain a unified, market-reflective 
exchange rate

• Communicate and implement a comprehensive, 
systematic framework for CBN FX interventions to 
provide clarity to market participants as to when and 
how CBN may buy or sell FX. 
• Focus on transparently supporting market liquidity 
and price discovery.

Concentrate FX transactions in the 
official market

• Take measures to build liquidity in the NAFEM, 
including by easing remaining restrictions, and 
channeling oil-related inflows to the market.

Reduce trade restrictions that increase 
prices and poverty

• Lift import bans.
• Eliminate tariff deviations from ECOWAS CET.
• Adopt and implement a compliance trade program.

(E) PROVIDE URGENT RELIEF TO THE POPULATION

Scale-up and provide relief to the 
population

• Accelerate the roll out of targeted cash transfers.
• Allocate savings from PMS subsidy removal to 
sustainably expand cash transfers and other well-
targeted support.

PART 2 - Spotlight: Fostering 
productive jobs is vital to help 
Nigerians find pathways out of 
poverty

2.1.Sustainable poverty reduction 
relies on creating productive jobs

growth is not reaching poor and economically insecure 
Nigerians. Around 90 percent of Nigeria’s exports are 
in oil, an industry where job creation is limited (OEC, 
2024). Total factor productivity has also been in decline, 
while non-oil economic activity has shifted from low-
productivity agriculture to low-productivity services – 
this links with the shift in employment from agriculture 
to services described below (World Bank, 2022). Foreign 
direct investment, which can help drive job-creating 
innovation and overall investment, also remains low 
relative to the size of Nigeria’s economy and comparator 
countries (World Bank, 2023).

With growth proving too slow to outpace inflation, 
poverty has risen sharply. Since 2018, the share of 
Nigerians living below the national poverty line16 is 
estimated to have risen sharply from 40.1 percent to 
56.0 percent (Figure 2.1 A). Combined with population 
growth, this means that some 129 million Nigerians 
are living in poverty. This stark increase partly reflects 
Nigeria’s beleaguered growth record. Real GDP per 
capita has not recovered to the level it was at prior to 
the oil price-induced recession in 2016. The COVID-19 
pandemic compounded this drop in economic activity. 
Moreover, growth is failing to outpace inflation: 
large increases in prices across almost all goods have 
diminished purchasing power.

Ensuring that economic growth reaches poor and 
economically insecure Nigerians hinges on improving 
labor market outcomes. The labor market is the main 
vehicle through which the proceeds of economic growth 
are shared among households and individuals; the 
labor market is a key determinant of job creation and 
entrepreneurship. Labor – that is, time and effort – is 
the only asset for many poor and economically insecure 
Nigerians (Fields, 2019). This means labor market 
policies that can support the creation of productive 
private sector jobs are essential for lifting Nigerians out 
of poverty.

The structure of growth has not been conducive to 
poverty reduction; exports remain dependent on 
oil, total factor productivity has declined, and non-
oil economic activity shifted from low-productivity 
agriculture to low-productivity services. Even when the 
economy was growing rapidly in the early 2010s, richer 
Nigerians benefited more than poorer Nigerians (Lain & 
Vishwanath, 2022). Macroeconomic data hint at why

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
26

The time for poverty-reducing labor market policies 
is now: Nigeria’s young and growing population 
provides the country with huge economic potential. 
Almost two-thirds of Nigerians are aged less than 25 
(Figure 2.2). Millions of Nigerians will therefore soon 
come of working age. In the next 10 years, the number 
of 15-24 year-old Nigerians is set to increase by more

than 12 million. The high number of working-age 
people relative to those who are too young or old to 
work can give Nigeria a sizable “demographic dividend”. 
It can drive inclusive growth and poverty reduction (Fox 
& Gandhi, 2021). Harnessing the potential for such a 
demographic dividend requires urgent action to invest in 
human capital and create higher productivity jobs.

The lack of productive jobs not only constrains 
inclusive growth and poverty reduction; it also 
risks squandering the potential of young Nigerians’ 
ambitions and could fuel conflict. Most young 
Nigerians aspire to work in professions such as 
accountancy, the civil service, medicine, engineering, and 
teaching (Lain, et al., 2021). They are also optimistic, 
with around 8 in 10 15-25 year-olds believing that it 
is likely or very likely that they will one day attain the 
dream job to which they aspire. Failing to harness these 
ambitions and this optimism represents a waste of young 
Nigerians’ potential. Worse still, it could drive frustration 
and even conflict. Evidence from across Sub-Saharan 
Africa suggests that people – especially young people 
– are at higher risk of being drawn into conflict when

productive livelihood opportunities are lacking (Cramer, 
2010).

2.2. Employment alone is not 
enough to lift Nigerians out of 
poverty

working-age Nigerians are working, meaning they 
engage either in paid employment or subsistence 
agriculture, regardless of whether they are in the richest 
or the poorest consumption decile (Figure 2.4)19. 
Moreover, unemployment is, if anything, higher among 
Nigerians from richer households. Work therefore 
offers no guarantee of exiting poverty. In the absence of 
widespread social security, households must engage in 
some sort of activities to provide them with the income, 
or directly with food, needed to survive. Only people 
from richer households can afford to remain openly 
unemployed for long spells while searching for a job.

Most working-age Nigerians are employed, but many 
of them remain poor. Around 75.8 percent of working-
age Nigerians are employed, meaning that they work 
for pay or profit (Figure 2.3)17. Similarly, Nigeria’s 
unemployment rate – the share of those in the labor force 
who are not employed but who are actively searching 
for and are available for employment – is relatively low 
at just 4.7 percent. Being employed, however, is no 
guarantee of being able to escape poverty. Many jobs 
are not productive and therefore remunerative enough 
to afford a life beyond poverty18. This mix of high 
employment and high poverty is not unique to Nigeria: 
a similar situation persists in other countries in Western 
and Central Africa and in peer countries in other regions 
(Figure 2.3).

The key question for Nigeria’s labor market is 
therefore not so much whether someone works, but 
what they do. Characterizing the productive livelihoods 
that can lift people out of poverty relies on examining 
detailed information on the types of jobs people do, the 
occupations and activities in which they engage, and 
the nature of the establishments in which they work. 
It is this detailed profile of people’s jobs to which the 
subsequent sections turn.

17 For the NLFS, the working-age population is defined as those aged 15 years or more.
18 Around 12.5 percent of employed Nigerians are also underemployed, in the sense that they work less than 40 hours per week and are willing and 
able to work more.
19 The estimated share of people who are working in the 2018/19 NLSS is lower than the estimated share of people who are employed in the 
NLFS. This may reflect the surveys’ different questionnaires and data-collection methods. The analysis in this spotlight focuses on the NLFS, as its 
approach was specifically designed to gather the most accurate labor market data. In particular, the NLFS was designed to reduce proxy responses, 
whereby one household member provides responses on behalf of another. Proxy responses can lead to lower estimates for the share of people who 
are working or employed, because household members may not know about one another’s labor market activities.

Notes. The share who are working does not distinguish paid employment from unpaid activities like subsistence farming, as the questions in 
the 2018/19 NLSS were slightly different from the NLFS. Sources: 2018/19 NLSS and World Bank estimates.

2.3. Very few jobs allow workers 
to exit poverty

Wage jobs allow workers to escape poverty. Among 
employed people, the share of those who hold wage jobs 
is around double for those from households in the top 
60 percent of the consumption distribution compared to 
those in the bottom 40 percent (Figure 2.5). This could 
reflect the fact that obtaining a wage job helps boost 
household income, but also, those coming from richer 
households have higher levels of education and human 
capital, which may help them obtain a wage job in the 
first place. Either way, wage jobs are at least associated 
with exiting poverty.

Wage jobs also lack the non-pecuniary benefits that 
are often associated with job formality in high-income 
countries. Only around half of wage workers hold 
written contracts with their employer. The shares of wage 
employed Nigerians with employers paying into social 
security, with annual leave, and with sick leave are just 
28.0 percent, 22.6 percent, 20.0 percent respectively.

Wage-employment is highly segmented, with certain 
types of well-paying wage jobs being concentrated 
in the public sector. On average, public sector wage 
jobs pay 66.2 percent more than private sector (or 
other) wage jobs (Figure 2.7). However, higher-skilled 
individuals sort disproportionately into the public 
sector. Overall, around one-third of wage workers hold 
public-sector jobs, but this share rises to around one-
half among those with post-secondary education. As 
such, considering individual characteristics, such as 
age, sex, and education, reduces the estimated wage 
premium for public-sector workers to about 36.5 percent

Yet wage jobs are extremely scarce, and even those 
with higher levels of education have no guarantee of 
obtaining one. Only around 13.6 percent of employed 
Nigerians primarily engage in wage jobs (Figure 2.6). 
Higher education increases the likelihood of holding 
a wage job, but even among those with post-secondary 
education, more than half of employed people hold self-
employment jobs. Among self-employment jobs, 9 in 10 
involve working in one’s own farm or non-farm business,

(Annex 1). Yet the fact that a large earnings premium 
remains even after accounting for these characteristics 
suggests that there may be unfair barriers to entry to

public sector jobs, which could lock out the poor and 
economically insecure. Moreover, public sector workers 
may have stronger bargaining power due to (1) collective

bargaining arrangements, (2) their involvement in 
providing key services whose disruption is politically 
sensitive, and (3) their direct proximity to policymakers 
(Abdallah, C; Coady, D; Jirsavetakul, F, 2023).

and increase earnings. More than 8 in 10 non-farm 
enterprises only employ labor from inside the household. 
Employing people from outside the household is 
therefore rare. Constraints on enterprise growth could 
also limit both the number and the productivity of wage 
jobs. Firm survival and firm growth are challenges that 
start with the very smallest household enterprises.

Additionally, wage workers in larger establishments 
have significantly higher earnings, as larger firms are 
more productive. Wage-employed Nigerians working in 
establishments with 20 or more people have 71.0 percent 
higher earnings than those working in establishments 
with fewer than 20 people. This difference drops to 
around 40.9 percent – still a large premium – when 
taking individual characteristics into account (see 
Annex 1). Yet most wage jobs in Nigeria are not in 
large establishments and such jobs are especially hard to 
obtain for those with lower education levels: among wage 
workers, around 21.5 percent of those with primary 
education (or lower) work in establishments with 20 
or more people, but this rises to 35.8 percent of those 
with secondary education and 60.1 percent of those with 
post-secondary education20.

While more education helps Nigerians gain high-
skilled jobs, these jobs are relatively rare even for 
those with secondary or post-secondary education. 
Just 8.7 percent of employed Nigerians hold high-
skilled jobs: these are the jobs that use skills associated 
with secondary education and beyond (Figure 2.8). 
Even among employed Nigerians with post-secondary 
education, the majority do not hold high-skilled jobs. 
For Nigerians with secondary education, only 7.2 percent 
workers hold high-skilled jobs. While a mismatch of 
skills or opportunities can contribute to the difficulty of 
obtaining high-skilled jobs, an insufficient number of 
such jobs clearly contributes to it as well.

Non-farm household enterprises are typically very 
small and struggle to grow, as self-employed Nigerians 
face constraints in trying to expand their productivity

20 As evidence from across Western and Central Africa shows, the scarcity of jobs in large establishments in not unique to Nigeria. For example, 
Davies and Kerr (2018) document the challenges that firms face in surviving and growing in Ghana.

2.4 Nigeria’s labor market is 
changing as work shifts from 
agriculture to services, but this 
is not raising productivity and 
earnings

engaged in agriculture dropped from about half in 2000 
to just over a third by 2021 (Figure 2.9). Services now 
comprise more than half of Nigeria’s jobs. This echoes 
the overall shifts in economic activity from agriculture to 
services.

Notwithstanding the persistent low quality of jobs in 
Nigeria, the labor market is in flux, with employment 
shifting dramatically from agriculture to services in 
the last two decades. The share of Nigerian workers

Even with the influx of workers, services are more 
productive than agriculture, but the shift towards 
services has not increased living standards; this is 
partly because some of the specific types of service-

sector jobs to which Nigerians are moving have 
relatively low productivity, especially those in retail 
and wholesale trade. Labor productivity remains more 
than two-thirds higher in services than in agriculture 
in Nigeria, even though the increased labor supply 
to the sector would be expected to exert downward 
pressure on earnings. Yet Nigeria’s service sector is highly 
heterogeneous. Some sub-sectors within services have 
labor productivity levels that are close to, or even less, 
than agriculture. Among these is commerce/hospitality, 
which includes retail and wholesale trade jobs (Figure 
2.10). Many of Nigeria’s new service-sector jobs are in 
retail and wholesale trade. This means the productivity 
gains of employment shifting from agriculture to services

are not guaranteed for all workers and could explain 
why there has been no accompanying increase in living 
standards.

2.5. Accessing productive jobs is 
even harder for Nigeria’s women 
and young people

Unequal labor market opportunities for women 
and men constrain inclusive growth and poverty 
reduction. Lower labor market engagement from 
women may cause Nigeria to miss out on a large part of 
its demographic dividend and misallocate its resources. 
Barriers to entry into the labor market or into certain

jobs prevent women from engaging in those activities 
which best match their skills and which would fully 
harness their productive potential (Cuberes & Teignier, 
2016; Georgieva, Sayeh, & Sahay, 2022). Removing such 
labor market barriers to women today can also promote 
further investment in human capital, shaping the 
outcomes of future generations (Muller & Casabonne, 
2020).

that are less likely to lift them out of poverty. In 
particular, employed Nigerian women are more likely to 
be underemployed than employed Nigerian men, in the 
sense that they work less than 40 hours per week, but are 
willing and able to work more (Figure 2.11). Moreover, 
they are less likely to hold wage jobs and jobs that utilize 
higher skill levels.

and wholesale trade is around double the share of 
employed Nigerian men (Figure 2.12). Women are 
therefore disproportionately engaged in a sector where 
employment has been growing, but without gains in 
productivity and earnings. This implies that policies 
are needed to either improve productivity in retail and 
wholesale trade jobs or to help open up jobs to women in 
other sub-sectors with higher productivity.

This underlines the additional constraints women face in 
accessing higher paying jobs.

Young people have more difficulties accessing higher-
skill jobs; this warrants special attention given the 
investments made in their human capital. The share 
of Nigerians who have attained primary, secondary, or 
post-secondary education is 7.8 percentage points higher 
among those aged less than 30 years compared to those 
aged 30 or more (World Bank, 2024). The literacy rate 
is also significantly higher for younger Nigerians. This 
suggests that the average skill levels of new labor market 
entrants may be improving. However, most young people 
are not currently finding jobs that harness their higher 
educational attainment. Young people are less likely 
to be employed than the non-youth overall, although 
this mainly reflects the fact that many of them are still 
in full-time education (Figure 2.16). However, those 
young people that do gain jobs are more likely to be 
underemployed and they are much more likely to work 
in jobs that do not use higher skill levels. This directly 
limits the returns to the time and resources spent on 
their education.

Women’s labor market outcomes are associated with 
family formation and gender norms, especially in 
Nigeria’s northern states. The employment gap between 
working-age women and men is strongly associated with 
marriage, a proxy for family formation (Figure 2.13). 
Family formation is also significantly associated with 
a larger gender gap in the number of hours worked. 
Once caring for children and household chores are 
taken into account women in both the north and the 
south of Nigeria work more hours than men, revealing 
how unpaid care work constrains women’s available 
time in the labor market (Figure 2.14)21. In northern 
Nigeria, overall employment as well as hours worked are 
correlated with proxies for local restrictive gender norms.

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
35

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
36

STAYING THE COURSE: Progress amid pressing challenges

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
37

2.6. Short- and long-run strategies 
can help Nigeria’s labor market to 
drive poverty reduction

poverty. Yet they remain rare in Nigeria; urgent action is 
needed to help create them. Wage job creation depends 
on growth, so the macro-fiscal reforms described in Part 
1 provide critical foundations. Boosting market access, 
increasing openness to trade, and promoting a better 
business environment, could help firms grow and increase 
their job-creation potential – this can help make sure 
growth is job-rich. To do this, Nigeria can better leverage 
its large internal market by reducing transport barriers, 
including through investing in new infrastructure and

Productive job creation – the cornerstone of 
sustainably reducing poverty – will depend on 
fostering macro-fiscal stability, accelerating growth, 
and improving the environment for private sector 
development. Wage jobs, especially those in large 
establishments, offer workers the best chance of escaping

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
38

STAYING THE COURSE: Progress amid pressing challenges

eliminating informal trade costs. Basic infrastructure – 
such as an uninterrupted electricity supply – constitutes 
a critical input for many firms. International trade is also 
essential for increasing the size of the market for export 
goods and helping domestic firms to import inputs, 
while also imposing competitive discipline to drive up 
productivity and earnings. Working towards competitive 
neutrality – meaning that no firms should have undue 
advantages from who owns or controls them – and 
fostering a more conducive business environment could 
support better allocation of resources in the Nigerian 
economy and attract more foreign direct investment.

in Nigeria for years or decades in the future (Fox & 
Gandhi, 2021). Raising productivity in farm and 
non-farm enterprises could increase earnings for their 
owners, lifting them out of poverty, as well as potentially 
allowing them to grow and employ others outside of 
the household. While agriculture represents a declining 
share of jobs in Nigeria, it remains a crucial income-
generating activity for the poor and economically 
insecure. 
Therefore, 
policies 
to 
promote 
farm 
productivity and commercialization – including new 
and more climate-resilient crop varieties and investments 
in storage, transport, and market access – will be vital 
(Oseni & Winters, 2009; FAO, 2018; Beegle & 
Christiaensen, 2019; Ecker & Hatzenbuehler, 2021). 
Similarly, non-farm household enterprises would benefit 
from policies that make it easier to acquire key inputs 
including through improved access to finance, build the 
infrastructure on which small businesses rely, and foster 
output market access. This echoes many of the reforms 
to the business environment that help medium and large 
firms create wage jobs.

On the labor supply side, Nigeria can hone the 
skills required for the productive jobs. Despite the 
significant investment in human capital, Nigeria still has 
a long way to go to equip workers with the skills they 
need for productive jobs and to boost the skills needed to 
establish, maintain, and grow firms. Given their health 
and education outcomes, a child born in Nigeria in 2020 
will only achieve 36 percent of the productivity he or 
she could have attained with full health and education, 
meaning Nigeria had among the lowest human capital 
levels in the world22. At the same time, many Nigerians 
who have achieved higher levels of education are not 
working in jobs utilizing commensurate skill levels. As 
sectoral shifts advance and other trends – including 
digitalization – progress, tracking Nigeria’s changing 
skills needs will be vital. Given the depth of its new and 
improved labor force survey, Nigeria could consider 
putting in place a formal skills monitoring system to 
help guide policies around basic education, vocational 
training, and migration23.

Policy initiatives that cover only highly-formalized 
wage jobs – including policies focused on public 
sector workers and minimum wage legislation – may 
not reach many of Nigeria’s poorest workers directly. 
While increasing the demand for wage workers is a key 
policy priority, the vast majority of employed Nigerians 
– especially from poorer households – do not currently 
hold such jobs. This limits the direct effects that policies 
focusing on subsets of wage workers can have on poverty. 
In particular, public sector wage jobs are not only rare 
and disproportionately occupied by comparatively better 
off Nigerians; they also pay significantly more than 
private sector and other types of wage jobs, even after 
taking individual characteristics into account, suggesting 
there are additional barriers to entry into public sector 
jobs, which may lock out the poor and economically 
insecure. Similarly, minimum wage legislation may not 
directly reach the poorest workers because they do not

Short- and medium-run policies to boost productivity 
in farm and non-farm household enterprises would 
provide relief while higher-paying jobs are not 
available and could even support some to succeed 
and grow. Even if the reforms outlined above eventually 
help wage jobs proliferate, “informal will be normal”

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
39

hold wage jobs and around a third of private sector 
wage earners receive less than minimum wage anyway, 
demonstrating that enforcement is imperfect. Raising 
minimum wages and public sector pay could also be 
fiscally costly.

are more severe – including in care and related services. 
Investing in skills development systems that strategically 
cater to labor markets abroad and developing a strong 
migration system to manage regular migration presents 
a major opportunity. Third, it is equally important to 
provide fallback or transitional opportunities – including 
by ensuring that public investments consider job 
creation potential – for those young people that do not 
have better employment opportunities.

Therefore, policy initiatives could focus directly on 
poor, economically insecure, and excluded workers, 
who would benefit from specific policies to improve 
their labor market outcomes; this includes improving 
labor market opportunities for women. Gender-
sensitive policies have the potential to work towards 
closing the gap between women’s and men’s labor market 
outcomes. Such polices could focus on: (1) keeping 
girls in school, which delays marriage and childbearing 
and hence helps increase scope for women’s economic 
participation; (2) improving the provision of childcare; 
and (3) relaxing or overcoming restrictive gender norms 
that limit women’s labor market participation through 
economic 
empowerment 
interventions 
combined 
with couples’ trainings or community sensitization, or 
correcting misperceptions around women’s labor market 
participation.

State-specific 
policy 
initiatives 
can 
provide 
opportunities to trial smaller and more manageable 
programs before nation-wide rollouts. Labor market 
outcomes are highly heterogeneous across Nigeria. For 
example, wage-employment is generally more common 
in the country’s southern states, while a larger share of 
employed Nigerians primarily engage in agriculture in 
the northern states (Figure 2.17). Hence, specific policies 
and the way they are targeted could be approached 
differently across states. Given the scale of Nigeria’s labor 
market challenges, working at the state level may also 
provide an opportunity to try out initiatives before they 
are implemented across the country. All of Nigeria’s labor 
market challenges cannot be addressed instantaneously, 
but breaking the problem down into more “bitesize” 
pieces could offer policymakers a springboard to try, 
evaluate, and potentially scale up interventions.

Likewise, finding employment solutions that cater to 
Nigeria’s large and growing youth population is an 
urgent policy priority; this means (1) supporting skills 
and job matching, (2) managing external migration, 
and (3) providing fallback employment. First, skills 
programs need to be better linked with labor demand 
and supported by an efficient job matching system. In 
the current context where job opportunities are scarce, 
it is critical to ensure that the right people are matched 
for the right kind of jobs, and that the youth invest in 
those skills that will provide an economic return. The 
increasing global (and domestic) demand for digital skills 
can be one such area. Second, Nigeria needs to invest in 
facilitating migration and developing managed migration 
systems. While Nigeria’s demographics are youthful, 
many developed economies are rapidly aging and need 
workers. Nigeria can capitalize on this by proactively 
facilitating migration to those destinations, especially in 
occupations where skills shortages in aging economies

Given the wide range of policies that can bolster 
Nigeria’s 
labor 
market 
outcomes, 
continued 
investment in the country’s labor market data will 
remain essential. The policy insights in this spotlight 
– which are summarized in Table 2.1Table 2.1 – rely 
on Nigeria’s new and improved labor force survey, the 
NLFS, which was relaunched with a methodology that 
matches international best practices at the end of 2022. 
Maintaining this momentum on data collection will be 
crucial for making sure new policies are informed by 
evidence and give the poorest Nigerians the labor market 
opportunities they need to escape poverty.

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
40

STAYING THE COURSE: Progress amid pressing challenges

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
41

Strategies to create productive wage jobs and build the right skills
• 
Maintain momentum on reforms to foster macro-fiscal stability and accelerate growth (see 
Part 1)
• 
Leverage Nigeria's large internal market by investing in infrastructure and eliminating 
informal trade costs
• 
Reinforce provision of the basic infrastructure needed by firms to survive and grow, 
including uninterrupted electricity
• 
Reduce barriers to international trade to promote exports
• 
Work towards competitive neutrality, meaning that no firms should have undue 
advantages from who owns or controls them
• 
Foster a more conducive business environment
• 
Continue investing in human capital
• 
Track the economy's skills needs, as sectoral shifts and other trends - including 
digitalization - progress

Solutions to boost productivity in farm and non-farm household enterprises 
For farms:
• 
Promote more climate-resilient crop varieties
• 
Invest in storage and transportation
• 
Support access to output markets
For non-farm household enterprises:
• 
Ensure enterprises can access key inputs, including through better access to finance
• 
Bolster basic infrastructure
• 
(As with farms) support access to output markets

Tailored policies for poor, economically insecure, and excluded workers, including 
women and young people
For women:
• 
Help girls stay in school
• 
Improve provision of childcare
• 
Overcome restrictive gender norms through economic empowerment interventions and 
trainings/community sensitization
For young people:
• 
Support skills development and job matching
• 
Manage external migration, including by helping young emigrants reach destination 
countries that need their skills
• 
Provide fallback employment – including by ensuring that public investments consider job 
creation potential – to help improve access to productive jobs
Trial interventions at the state level before scaling up

Plus: keep investing in labor market data to track progress and hone policies

PART 2: SPOTLIGHT: FOSTERING PRODUCTIVE JOBS IS VITAL TO HELP NIGERIANS FIND PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY
42

STAYING THE COURSE: Progress amid pressing challenges

STAYING THE COURSE: Progress amid pressing challenges