FFIEC
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council

GAAP
generally accepted accounting principles

G-SIB
global systemically important banking organization

LFBO
large and foreign banking organization

LISCC
Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee

MRIAs
matters requiring immediate attention

OCC
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency

SEC
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission

U.S. G-SIB
global systemically important banking organization headquartered in the
United States

wSTWF
weighted short-term wholesale funding

The banking sector remains sound overall, and most banks continue to report capital levels above

regulatory requirements. Nevertheless, some banks have experienced sizeable declines in the fair

value of some fixed-rate assets reflecting the increase in interest rates over the past two years.

Recent earnings performance has been in line with pre-pandemic levels, and returns on average

assets and equity for the first half of 2023 exceeded their 10-year averages. Overall, banks have

ample liquidity and limited reliance on short-term wholesale funding. Loan delinquencies are rising

The Federal Reserve is taking steps to enhance the speed, force, and agility of its supervision, as

appropriate, to reflect lessons learned from the recent large U.S. bank failures and its supervision

of Silicon Valley Bank. These include improving its supervision of liquidity and interest rate risks by

conducting targeted reviews at banks exhibiting higher interest rate and liquidity risk profiles, as

well as conducting focused training and outreach on supervisory expectations for interest rate and

liquidity risk management for banks and examiners. The Federal Reserve is committed to taking

additional steps to strengthen its supervisory efforts.

The Federal Reserve is also monitoring for potential credit deterioration, particularly within the con-

sumer and commercial real estate (CRE) lending segments. Additionally, the Federal Reserve has

implemented a new novel bank supervision program to improve oversight of banks engaged in non-

traditional and financial technology-related activities.

This report focuses on developments in three areas:

1. Banking System Conditions provides an overview of the financial condition of the

2. Regulatory Developments outlines the Federal Reserve’s recent regulatory policy work.

3. Supervisory Developments highlights the Federal Reserve’s current supervisory programs and

The banking system remains sound overall. Banking organizations continue to report capital and

liquidity levels above regulatory minimums. Earnings performance has remained solid and in line

with pre-pandemic levels, despite recent pressure on net interest margins. Deposit declines

related to the March banking stresses have slowed. Loan delinquency rates remain low overall.

However, delinquencies for CRE and some consumer sectors have increased from their low levels,

and banks have increased credit loss provisions. Liquidity and interest rate risks also remain

elevated for some banks, partially attributed to the increased funding costs and significant fair

Banking Firms Increased Regulatory Capital, but Tangible Capital
Remains Depressed

Regulatory capital ratios increased during the

Figure 1. Aggregate common equity tier 1
(CET1) capital ratio

first half of 2023. The industry’s aggregate

common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital ratio rose

to 12.5 percent as of June 30, 2023, a fourth

consecutive quarterly increase (figure 1). This

reflects over $2 trillion in CET1 capital across

However, tangible capital levels, which include

remained under pressure for many banks. As

still a concern for banks facing liquidity constraints, which could force some of these banks to sell

both reduced loan demand and tighter lending

Within the consumer loan segment, credit card loan delinquencies have increased post-pandemic.

Bank earnings performance during the first half of 2023 remained sound. Return on average

income helped offset lower net interest income and increased provisions. The industry’s non-

quarter, respectively.5 Even after excluding these gains, earnings were comparable with pre-

quarter of 2023 as increased rates paid on

deposits and wholesale funding were not fully

leases in the first quarter of 2023 to an

annual rate of 0.73 percent of average loans

and leases in the second quarter of 2023.

Interest income to average interest-earning assets
Interest expense to average interest-earning assets
Net interest margin

Note: Net interest margin is net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets, annualized. Net interest
income is interest income minus interest expense.

Bank Market Indicators Show Mixed Signals

Market assessments of bank risk, including the market leverage ratio and credit default swap

(CDS) spreads, provide a forward-looking assessment of the strength of the banking system. The

market leverage ratio is a measure of a firm’s financial position that considers the relationship

between a firm’s market capitalization and its liabilities. Lower stock prices reduce the ratio of a

firm’s market capitalization to its debt, which indicates less market confidence in a firm’s financial

strength. Conversely, higher stock prices produce a higher ratio, reflecting a higher degree of confi-

dence in a firm’s financial strength. As a complement to market leverage, CDS spreads track the

price of insurance against a default by a given firm. If a firm’s CDS spread rises, it means the

market has lower confidence in a firm’s creditworthiness. Lower CDS spreads indicate higher confi-

dence in a firm’s creditworthiness, according to the market.6

During 2023, the average market leverage ratio for the largest banks has declined, remaining

lower than levels seen at the beginning of the year. The average CDS spread for the largest banks

also worsened between the start of March and early May. The average CDS spread has since

fallen below its levels at the start of the year, though it is still elevated relative to pre-pandemic

Credit rating downgrades from Moody’s and S&P Global in August contributed to pressure on some

bank stock prices. These two credit agencies downgraded credit ratings or lowered outlooks for

more than 20 banks, affecting all but the largest tier of banks. Both Moody’s and S&P Global refer-

enced the higher interest rate environment and CRE exposure as considerations in the down-

Figure 10. Average credit default swap (CDS) spread and market leverage ratio (daily)

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
96
108
120
 CDS spreads (left axis)

7.0
7.3
7.6
7.9
8.2
8.5
8.8
9.1
9.4
9.7
10.0

Note: The market leverage ratio is the ratio of a firm’s market capitalization to the sum of market capitalization and the
book value of liabilities. Averages are calculated from available observations for the eight LISCC firms (Bank of America
Corporation, The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, Citigroup Inc., The Goldman Sachs Group, JPMorgan Chase &
Co., Morgan Stanley, State Street Corporation, and Wells Fargo & Company).

Source: Federal Reserve staff calculations using Bloomberg data.

6 See appendix A for additional information on market indicators.

This section provides a recap of banking sector conditions for the third quarter of 2023, based on

earnings results for 22 large U.S. bank holding companies and one large savings and loan holding

company.7 While such trends are indicative, it should be noted that the sample may not neces-

sarily be representative of the banking sector.

In the third quarter of 2023, aggregate large bank profitability, as measured by return on equity,

approximated 12 percent, roughly the same level as reported in the second quarter of 2023. As

compared with the second quarter, large banks reported lower net interest income, which was

offset by higher capital markets fees and a smaller credit loss provision.

experienced in each of the first two quarters in 2023. Most also reported that deposit balances

were stable during the third quarter of 2023.

growth was muted. Loan loss rates were largely unchanged quarter-over-quarter but were higher

than those experienced in the third quarter of 2022.

The aggregate CET1 capital ratio for large banks approximated 12 percent on September 30,

2023, which was higher than the level seen at June 30, 2023, and at the end of 2022. Higher

CET1 capital ratio levels reflect targeted efforts by bank management teams to build CET1 capital

Supervision and Regulation Report. Significant actions are detailed in table 1 below. All Supervi-

sion and Regulation (SR) and Consumer Affairs (CA) letters are available on the Federal Reserve

8/8/2023
Federal Reserve Board provides additional information on its program to supervise novel activities in the banks it oversees
and activities that involve crypto-assets and distributed ledger or “blockchain” technology.
Press release: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20230808a.htm

8/29/2023
Agencies request comment on proposed rule to require large banks to maintain long-term debt to improve financial stability
and resolution.
Joint press release: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20230829a.htm

8/29/2023
Agencies propose guidance to enhance resolution planning at large banks.
Joint press release: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20230829b.htm

10/6/2023
Federal Reserve Board finalizes a rule establishing capital requirements for insurers supervised by the Board.
Press release: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20231006a.htm

10/24/2023
Agencies issue principles for climate-related financial risk management for large financial institutions.
Joint press release: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20231024b.htm

8 The Federal Reserve publishes SR and CA letters to address significant policy and procedural matters related to the
Federal Reserve System’s safety and soundness and consumer compliance supervisory responsibilities, respectively.
SR letters are available on the Board’s public website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/
srletters.htm, and CA letters are available on the Board’s public website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/
supervisionreg/caletters/caletters.htm.

In July, the bank regulatory agencies invited public comment on a proposal to modify large bank

capital requirements.9 The changes would implement the final components of the Basel III agree-

ment, also known as the Basel III endgame.

The proposal seeks to apply a broader set of capital requirements to an increasing number of

large banking organizations—generally applying them to banking organizations with $100 billion or

Most banks currently would have enough capital to meet the proposed requirements. The proposal

is estimated to result in an aggregate 16 percent increase in CET1 capital requirements for all

large banks, with the increase principally affecting the largest and most complex banks. The

effects would vary for each banking organization based on its activities and risk profile. Under the

proposal, large banks would begin transitioning to the new framework on July 1, 2025, with full

Separately, the Federal Reserve Board requested comment on a proposal that would make certain

adjustments to the calculation of the risk-based capital surcharge for global systemically important

banking organizations (G-SIBs), also known as the G-SIB surcharge. The changes would better

align the surcharge to each banking organization’s systemic risk profile, including by measuring

indicators of a banking organization’s systemic importance over the entire year, instead of only at

Comments on both proposals were initially due by November 30, 2023, though that was extended

to January 16, 2024 to allow interested parties more time to analyze the issues and prepare their

9 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Agencies Request Comment on Proposed Rules to Strengthen
Capital Requirements for Large Banks,” news release, July 27, 2023, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/
pressreleases/bcreg20230727a.htm.
10 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Agencies Request Comment on Proposed Rules to Strengthen
Capital Requirements for Large Banks,” https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20230727a.htm.
11 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Agencies Extend Comment Period on Proposed Rules to
Strengthen Large Bank Capital Requirements,” news release, October 20, 2023, https://www.federalreserve.gov/
newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20231020a.htm.

In August, the agencies requested public comment on a proposal to enhance the resolvability of

large banks that are not G-SIBs. G-SIBs are already subject to substantial resolution-related

The proposal would require non-G-SIB large banks with at least $100 billion in total assets to

issue and maintain a minimum amount of long-term debt, which could be used to absorb losses

and to increase the options available to resolve such banks in case of failure. By reducing the risk

that depositors would face losses, long-term debt also could reduce the speed and severity of

bank runs and limit contagion when a bank is under stress. The proposal includes transition and

phase-in provisions and would allow for certain outstanding long-term debt to apply toward the

minimum requirements to provide in-scope banks with a reasonable period to comply with the

Comments on this proposal are due by November 30, 2023.

In July, the agencies updated their existing guidance on liquidity risks and contingency planning.13

The updated guidance indicates that depository institutions should regularly evaluate and update

their contingency funding plans. It further notes that the discount window is an important tool that

depository institutions can utilize in managing liquidity risk, and that the agencies encourage

depository institutions to incorporate the discount window as part of their contingency funding

The guidance also reinforces the supervisory expectation that if the discount window is part of a

depository institution’s contingency funding plans, the depository institution should establish and

maintain operational readiness to use the discount window, including by conducting periodic

12 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Agencies Request Comment On Proposed Rule To Require
Large Banks to Maintain Long-Term Debt to Improve Financial Stability and Resolution,” news release, August 29, 2023,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20230829a.htm.
13 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Agencies Update Guidance on Liquidity Risks and Contingency
Planning,” news release, July 28, 2023, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20230728a.htm.

This section provides an overview of recent supervisory efforts to assess institutions’ safety and

soundness and compliance with laws and regulations. There are separate subsections for large

financial institutions with assets of $100 billion or more and community and regional banking

organizations. Supervisory approaches and priorities differ by a financial institution’s size and

The Federal Reserve is responsible for overseeing the implementation of certain laws and regula-

tions relating to consumer protection and community reinvestment. The scope of the Federal

Reserve’s supervisory jurisdiction varies based on the consumer law or regulation and on the

asset size of the state member bank. Consumer-focused supervisory work is designed to promote

a fair and transparent marketplace for financial services and to ensure supervised institutions

comply with applicable federal consumer protection laws and regulations.

More information about the Federal Reserve’s consumer-focused supervisory program can be

found in the Federal Reserve’s 109th Annual Report 2022.14

Supervisors conduct examinations to evaluate a banking organization’s activities, risk manage-

ment, and financial condition.15 Examinations include assessments of capital adequacy, asset

quality, earnings strength and quality, liquidity position and funding sources, sensitivity to interest

rate risks, and the quality of board and management oversight. Supervisors may also decide

whether to further focus examinations on a firm’s known and potential risks. For example, exam-

iners may undertake additional credit quality and credit risk management testing at a bank with a

rapidly growing concentration in CRE loans.

If supervisors find risk management or financial condition to be deficient, they provide direction

and require the bank to correct its weaknesses. This direction takes the form of confidential

supervisory findings: matters requiring attention (MRAs) and, for more significant issues that

14 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 109th Annual Report of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System (Washington: Board of Governors, July 2023), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2022-
annual-report.pdf.
15 See “Understanding Federal Reserve Supervision,” https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/how-federal-reserve-
supervisors-do-their-jobs.htm.

must be corrected on a priority basis, matters requiring immediate attention (MRIAs). These are

communicated to a banking organization’s management and board of directors in a written exam

or inspection report. If a bank does not address these supervisory findings or the findings are sig-

nificant enough to pose an immediate threat to a bank’s safety and soundness, supervisors may

also lower the bank’s supervisory rating or pursue an enforcement action against the bank.

Supervisory ratings, which are confidential, provide an assessment of a firm’s risk management

and financial condition, based on examination results, supervisory findings, and other information

collected from banking organizations and monitored throughout the year. These ratings reflect

examiners’ overall judgment of the firm’s safety and soundness. Supervisory ratings are generally

issued once a year for larger banking organizations and every 18 months for smaller firms but may

also be issued in the interim if circumstances warrant.

The Federal Reserve supervises bank holding companies, savings and loan holding companies,

state member banks, and foreign banking organizations operating in the United States of varying

size and complexity. The Federal Reserve follows a risk-focused approach by scaling supervisory

work to the asset size and complexity of an institution.

• The Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) program supervises firms

that pose elevated risk to U.S. financial stability.

• The Large and Foreign Banking Organization (LFBO) program supervises U.S. firms with total

assets of $100 billion or more and all foreign banking organizations operating in the United

• The Regional Banking Organization (RBO) program supervises U.S. firms with total assets

• The Community Banking Organization (CBO) program supervises U.S. firms with less than

Table 2 provides an overview of the organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve by portfolio,

including the number of institutions and total assets in each portfolio.

Table 2. Summary of organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve, as of 2023:Q2

Portfolio
Definition
Number of
institutions

Large Institution Supervision Coordinating
Committee (LISCC)

Eight U.S. global systemically important banks (G-SIBs)
8
14.8

State member banks (SMBs)
SMBs within LISCC organizations
4
1.2

Large and foreign banking organizations
(LFBOs)

Non-LISCC U.S. firms with total assets $100 billion and
greater and FBOs

Large banking organizations (LBOs)
Non-LISCC U.S. firms with total assets $100 billion
and greater

Large FBOs (with IHC)
FBOs with combined U.S. assets $100 billion
and greater

Large FBOs (without IHC)
FBOs with combined U.S. assets $100 billion
and greater

Small FBOs (excluding rep offices)
FBOs with combined assets less than $100 billion
103
1.2

Small FBOs (rep offices)
FBO U.S. representative offices
33
0.0

State member banks
SMBs within LFBO organizations
9
1.1

Regional banking organizations (RBOs)
Total assets between $10 billion and $100 billion
101*
2.7

State member banks
SMBs within RBO organizations
32
1.0

Community banking organizations (CBOs)
Total assets less than $10 billion
3,483**
2.9

State member banks
SMBs within CBO organizations
655
0.6

Insurance and commercial savings and loan
holding companies (SLHCs)

SLHCs primarily engaged in insurance or commercial
activities

* Includes 100 holding companies and 1 state member bank that does not have a holding company.
** Includes 3,430 holding companies and 53 state member banks that do not have holding companies.

During 2023, the Federal Reserve intensified examination efforts on assessing banks’ prepared-

ness for managing liquidity, interest rate, and credit risks. In addition, supervisors initiated con-

tinuous monitoring for a small number of firms with a risk profile that could result in funding pres-

In August, the Federal Reserve established a Novel Activities Supervision Program to enhance the

supervision of novel activities conducted by banking organizations supervised by the Federal

Reserve. The program helps ensure that the risks associated with innovative activities are appro-

priately supervised and reviewed by examiners with expertise and experience in overseeing such

activities.16 The program focuses on novel activities related to crypto-assets, distributed ledger

technology, and complex, technology-driven partnerships with nonbanks to deliver financial ser-

vices to customers. The program is risk-focused and will work in partnership with existing Federal

Reserve supervisory teams to strengthen the oversight of novel activities.

16 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Creation of Novel Activities Supervision Program,”
SR Letter 23-7 (August 8, 2023), https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/SR2307.htm.

This section of the report discusses the supervisory approach for large financial institutions—

namely, U.S. firms with total assets of $100 billion or more, and foreign banking organizations

with combined U.S. assets of $100 billion or more. These firms are either within the LISCC port-

folio or the LFBO portfolio. Large financial institutions are subject to regulatory requirements that

are tiered to the risk profiles of these firms. Appendix A provides an overview of key regulatory

requirements. Supervisory efforts for large financial institutions focus on four components:

2. liquidity risk management and positions,

The Financial Condition of Large Financial Institutions

Large financial institutions’ capital positions remain above minimum regulatory ratios, although

unrealized losses on securities and other assets have weighed on their tangible capital. As of

June 30, 2023, their aggregate CET1 capital ratio was 12.3 percent. Supervisors continue to

closely monitor capital levels and, in June, completed the annual stress test for 23 large financial

institutions. This year, the supervisory severely adverse scenario included a severe global reces-

sion accompanied by a period of heightened stress in commercial and residential real estate, as

well as corporate debt markets. The stress test results show that the 23 large banks subject to

the test this year have sufficient capital to absorb more than $540 billion in losses and continue

to lend to households and businesses under stressful conditions.17

The Board also conducted an exploratory market shock on the trading books of the largest banks,

testing them against greater inflationary pressures and rising interest rates. While not contributing

to banks’ capital requirements, the exploratory stress test was used to further understand the

risks of bank trading activities and to assess the potential for testing banks against multiple sce-

Large financial institutions’ profitability, as measured by return on average assets and return on

equity, remained at solid levels, with both measures staying above their 10-year average during the

first half of 2023. However, net interest margins declined slightly because of slower lending

activity, increases in deposit costs, and greater reliance on higher cost wholesale funding. Large

financial institutions also increased credit loss provisions. Loan delinquencies remain low, but

there have been recent increases in past due balances of CRE and consumer loans.

17 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2023 Federal Reserve Stress Test Results (Washington: Board of
Governors, 2023), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2023-dfast-results-20230628.pdf.

Liquidity positions remain substantially above regulatory minimums. However, liquidity positions

have declined overall, and some large financial institutions have experienced deposit declines in

an increasingly competitive deposit market.

Trends in Supervisory Ratings and Findings

Federal Reserve supervisors summarize their assessments of large financial institutions using the

LFI rating system.18 The LFI rating system evaluates whether a firm possesses sufficient financial

and operational strength and resilience to maintain safe-and-sound operations and comply with

laws and regulations, including those related to consumer protection, through a range of condi-

tions.19 It includes three components: (1) capital planning and positions; (2) liquidity risk manage-

ment and positions; and (3) governance and controls. Each component is rated based on a four-

point non-numeric scale: Broadly Meets Expectations, Conditionally Meets Expectations,

Deficient-1, and Deficient-2. A firm is consid-

ered to be in satisfactory condition if all of its

Figure 11. Ratings for large financial
institutions

As of June 30, 2023, most large financial

institutions were meeting supervisory expecta-

tions with respect to capital planning and posi-

tions and liquidity risk management and posi-

tions. However, some firms continue to face

challenges meeting supervisory expectations

related to governance and controls, mainly

Note: Financial institutions are rated on a composite
basis from components based upon risk management,
operational controls, regulatory compliance, and asset
quality. The 2023 value is as of the end of 2023:Q2.
Key identifies bars in order from top to bottom.

because of deficiencies in the management of

risks related to operational resilience, cyberse-

curity, and BSA/AML compliance. As a result,

Source: Internal Federal Reserve supervisory
databases.

only about half of the large financial institu-

tions had satisfactory ratings across all three

Outstanding supervisory findings at large financial institutions have increased over the last year

(figure 12). Governance and controls findings represent approximately two-thirds of outstanding

issues (figure 13). More recently, matters requiring attention related to liquidity and interest rate

18 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Large Financial Institution (LFI) Rating System,” SR Letter
19-3/CA Letter 19-2, (February 26, 2019), https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1903.htm.
19 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Supervision and Regulation Report (Washington: Board of Gover-
nors, November 2019), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/201911-supervision-and-regulation-
report.pdf.

Figure 12. Outstanding number of supervisory
findings, large financial institutions

Figure 13. Outstanding supervisory findings by
category, large financial institutions

Note: Values prior to 2023 are as of year-end. The
2023 value is as of the end of 2023:Q2. The findings
count data are subject to revisions as issues are
reviewed, updated, and finalized; this could result in
minor historical count fluctuations.

Source: Internal Federal Reserve supervisory
databases.

Note: As of 2023:Q2, total supervisory findings by
portfolio were: LISCC—241; LBO—221; and FBO >
$100B—392. Key identifies bars in order from top
to bottom.

Source: Internal Federal Reserve supervisory
databases.

risk management have increased. This stems from the effects of higher interest rates on the

market value of banking organizations’ asset holdings, particularly investment securities. Because

unrealized losses diminish the ability of banks to sell securities to meet liquidity needs without

incurring losses, these unrealized losses can increase liquidity risks and require closer manage-

ment of contingency funding arrangements. Higher rates for deposit and wholesale funding also

increase firms’ interest costs and reduce earnings.

During 2023, the Federal Reserve completed examinations to assess liquidity and heightened

monitoring of liquidity risk management and liquidity positions at the largest banking organiza-

tions. This included reviewing contingency funding plans, access to secured funding, liquidity

stress test projections, and intraday liquidity risk management practices. Supervisors also

directed additional attention to evaluating firms’ interest rate risk positions and management.

Large financial institution supervisors initiated horizontal reviews to assess interest rate risk man-

agement practices across the large firms. Horizontal reviews include a series of examinations

focused on a single supervisory issue at several firms. This allows examiners to compare risk

management practices at different firms, identify gaps in practices at specific firms, and promote

sound practices across the industry. These reviews assess the adequacy of firms’ risk manage-

ment processes to identify, measure, monitor, and, as needed, mitigate interest rate and related

liquidity risks. To the extent gaps are identified, supervisors issue MRAs or MRIAs to direct banks

Although loan delinquencies remain low, large financial institutions have recently increased provi-

sions for credit losses. Some firms have indicated in public earnings releases that they expect

increased loan losses, particularly within the office segment of CRE.20 Supervisors, therefore, con-

tinue to closely monitor underwriting and loan quality. Recent efforts include a horizontal review to

address exposures to potential deterioration in CRE markets. Supervisors are centering the review

on evaluating credit risk monitoring and measurement, internal loan risk rating accuracy, steps

taken to mitigate the risk of losses on CRE loans, and CRE risk reporting to firms’ boards of direc-

Supervisors also continue to focus on monitoring credit risk associated with consumer loans as

delinquency and charge-off rates return to pre-pandemic levels. They are also conducting work to

assess the level and quality of loans to nonbank financial institutions, given a substantial increase

in lending to this segment in recent years.

See below for additional detail on large financial institutions’ supervisory priorities for the

Large Financial Institution Supervisory Priorities

• financial risks in the current economic environment, including

• risk-management practices in credit, market, and interest rate risk

• implementation of regulatory requirements (e.g., capital for counterparty credit exposure rules)

• contingency funding plans and intraday liquidity risk management

• changes in deposit behaviors and resulting effects on liquidity positions and risk-management

20 Matt Tracy, “U.S. Banks Increase Reserves for Commercial Real Estate Exposure,” Reuters website, July 21, 2023,
https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/us-banks-increase-reserves-commercial-real-estate-exposure-2023-07-21/.

• asset/liability management and stress testing

• liquidity risk management at foreign banking organization branches

• operational resilience, including cybersecurity, novel banking, and information technology risks

• compliance, internal loan review, and audit

• firm remediation efforts on previous supervisory findings

• recovery and resolution planning, including biannual resolution plan review for the G-SIBs

• remediation of and follow-up on resolution plan shortcomings and exam findings, as necessary

• international coordination among global supervisors

Community and Regional Banking Organizations

This section of the report discusses the financial condition and supervisory approach for banking

organizations with assets of less than $100 billion, including community banking organizations

(CBOs), which have less than $10 billion in total assets, and regional banking organizations

(RBOs), which have total assets between $10 billion and $100 billion.

The Financial Condition of CBOs and RBOs

CBOs and RBOs generally remain in sound financial condition, though increased funding costs are

Nearly all CBOs and RBOs remain well-capitalized. However, as interest rates have risen, some

banks have experienced sizeable declines in the fair value of their securities investments and, as

a result, have also seen their tangible equity levels decline. Federal Reserve examiners are closely

monitoring tangible equity levels and their impact on banks’ cost of funding.

Asset quality remains sound, and the level of problem loans remains low.21 CBOs and RBOs, how-

ever, hold a high proportion of the banking sector’s CRE loans. Some CRE market segments have

recently been under stress, particularly office. As a result, Federal Reserve examiners are closely

monitoring conditions and engaging with bank management to assess the degree to which banks

with high levels of CRE loans are prepared for potential changes in market conditions.

21 “Problem loans” are composed of 90-day-or-more past due loans, non-accrual loans, impaired loans, renegotiated or
restructured loans, and loans that are internally criticized or classified by a bank, as well as loans that were classified by
examiners during the previous examination.

Liquidity remains satisfactory for most CBOs and RBOs, but liquidity at several RBOs was

adversely affected by the banking stresses in the first half of 2023. For some RBOs, deposit

declines were material and required these banks to seek new wholesale funding. These wholesale

funding sources tend to be more costly and have put pressure on net interest margins for some

Federal Reserve examiners are closely monitoring liquidity risk management practices and contin-

gency funding plans, and examiners are assessing banks’ preparedness to manage unexpected

deposit outflows. They are also encouraging CBOs and RBOs to maintain actionable and diversi-

fied funding sources to help them manage the competitive deposit and funding environment.

Examiners are emphasizing that funding sources should be highly reliable and that banks should

have sufficient collateral pledged so they can quickly access funding when needed.

Trends in Supervisory Ratings and Findings

The Federal Reserve and the other federal and state banking agencies utilize the Uniform Financial

Institution Rating system (referred to as “CAMELS”) to present the examiner’s conclusions

regarding the overall condition of the bank. The CAMELS composite rating represents an overall

appraisal of six key assessment components covered under the CAMELS rating system: Capital

Adequacy, Asset quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to market risk.

For the inspection of a holding company with less than $100 billion in total consolidated assets,

the Federal Reserve utilizes the RFI rating system to present the examiner’s conclusions regarding

the overall condition of these holding companies. The RFI composite rating represents an overall

appraisal of three components covered under the RFI rating system: Risk management, Financial

Condition, and Impact of the non-depository entities on the subsidiary depository institutions.

The CAMELS and RFI rating systems are assigned based on a “1 to 5” numeric scale. A “1”

numeric rating indicates the highest rating, strongest performance and practices, and least degree

of supervisory concern. A “5” numeric rating indicates the lowest rating, weakest performance,

and highest degree of supervisory concern. Banks and holding companies that are rated “1” or

“2” are generally in satisfactory condition, while banks that are rated “3”, “4”, or “5” are in less-

Based on supervisory ratings as of June 2023, the vast majority of CBOs and RBOs remain in sat-

isfactory condition with effective risk management practices (figure 14). However, the financial

trends described above have resulted in an increase in the number of supervisory ratings down-

Figure 14. Top-tier ratings for CBO and
RBO firms

Figure 15. Outstanding supervisory findings,
CBO and RBO firms

Less-than-satisfactory (rated 3, 4, or 5)

Note: Values prior to 2023 are as of year-end. The
2023 value is as of the end of 2023:Q2. The findings
count data are subject to revisions as issues are
reviewed, updated, and finalized; this could result in
minor historical count fluctuations.

Note: Includes composite ratings for consolidated top-
tier holding companies and SMBs without holding com-
panies for CBO and RBO firms. The 2023 value is as
of the end of 2023:Q2. Key identifies bars in order
from top to bottom.

Source: Internal Federal Reserve supervisory
databases.

Source: Internal Federal Reserve supervisory
databases.

The number of supervisory findings outstanding at CBOs and RBOs increased in the first half of

2023 (figure 15). The number of findings per examination also increased in 2023 relative to

2022. For the first half of 2023, information technology weaknesses and operational risk were the

most cited supervisory issues for CBOs and RBOs (figures 16 and 17). Credit risk issues

remained elevated, and issues with market risk, liquidity risk, and BSA/AML compliance were an

increasing share of issues compared with prior years.

During 2023, the Federal Reserve intensified monitoring of CBOs and RBOs that appeared most

vulnerable to funding pressures. In many cases, Federal Reserve examiners issued findings

requiring bank management to improve access to contingent funding, increase liquid asset buf-

fers, and revalidate the deposit outflow assumptions in a bank’s contingency funding plans. Exam-

iners have also increased their focus on ensuring that banks understand the nature of their

deposit concentrations and accurately assess the stability of each deposit segment.

Federal Reserve examiners are also closely monitoring real estate markets and banks with large

CRE concentrations. While credit quality conditions currently remain stable, examiners are closely

monitoring banks’ asset quality metrics for emerging deterioration. Banks with larger CRE credit

concentrations are expected to have robust risk management practices including, but not

Figure 16. Outstanding supervisory findings by
category, CBO firms

Figure 17. Outstanding supervisory findings by
category, RBO firms

Management,
 risk management,
and internal controls

Management,
 risk management,
and internal controls

Note: As of 2023:Q2, there were 1,012 total supervi-
sory findings for CBO firms.

Note: As of 2023:Q2, there were 189 total supervisory
findings for RBO firms.

Source: Internal Federal Reserve supervisory
databases.

Source: Internal Federal Reserve supervisory
databases.

limited to, the ability to quantify the impact of changing economic conditions on their earnings,

Finally, Federal Reserve examiners are focused on the impact of rising interest rates on banks’

capital and earnings. In general, examiners expect banks to preserve capital when they are experi-

encing financial difficulties or when the macroeconomic outlook for their primary sources of earn-

See below for additional detail on CBO and RBO supervisory priorities for the coming months.

• high-risk loan portfolios and debt service coverage capacity in a changing interest rate

• credit concentrations, particularly in CRE loan portfolios

• impact of rising capitalization rates and real estate valuation uncertainty

• implementation of Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL) for CBOs in 2023

• liquidity coverage of uninsured deposits

• declines in the fair value of securities and low tangible equity levels

• information technology and cybersecurity preparedness

• fintech and banking-as-a-service activities

The Supervision and Regulation Report includes data both on institutions supervised by the Fed-

eral Reserve System and some institutions outside Federal Reserve supervision. The report

reflects data through October 3, 2023. This appendix details these sources.

The FFIEC Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, also known as the Call Report, is a peri-

odic report that is required to be completed by every national bank, state member bank, insured

nonmember bank, and savings association as of the last day of each calendar quarter. The details

required to be reported depend on the size of the institution, the nature of the institution’s activi-

ties, and whether it has foreign offices. Call Report data are a widely used source of timely and

accurate financial data regarding a bank’s financial condition and the results of its operations. The

data collected on the Call Report are used to monitor the condition, performance, and risk profiles

of reporting institutions individually and as an industry.

The Consolidated Financial Statement for Holding Companies, also known as the FR Y-9C report,

collects basic financial data from domestic bank holding companies (BHCs), savings and loan

holding companies (SLHCs), U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banking organizations

(U.S. IHCs), and securities holding companies (SHCs). Initiatives to reduce reporting costs for

firms led to increases in the minimum asset size thresholds for reporting from $500 million to

$1 billion, and from $1 billion to $3 billion, effective March 2015 and September 2018, respec-

tively. In addition, BHCs, SLHCs, U.S. IHCs, and SHCs meeting certain criteria may be required to

file this report, regardless of size. However, when such BHCs, SLHCs, U.S. IHCs, or SHCs own or

control, or are owned or controlled by, other BHCs, SLHCs, U.S. IHCs, or SHCs, only top-tier holding

companies must file this report for the consolidated holding company organization. The informa-

tion contained in the report is as of the last day of each calendar quarter.

The FR Y-14Q report is part of the Capital Assessments and Stress Testing information collection

(FR Y-14). The FR Y-14 data collection is used to assess the capital adequacy of large firms using

forward-looking projections of revenue and losses and to support supervisory stress test models

and continuous monitoring efforts, as well as to inform the Federal Reserve’s operational decision-

making and implement the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (2010).

The FR Y-14Q collects detailed data on BHCs’, IHCs’, and SLHCs’ various asset classes, capital

components, and categories of pre-provision net revenue.

H.8 Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States

The H.8 release provides an estimated weekly aggregate balance sheet for all commercial banks

in the United States. The H.8 release is primarily based on data that are reported weekly by a

sample of approximately 875 domestically chartered banks and foreign-related institutions. Data

for domestically chartered commercial banks and foreign-related institutions that do not report

weekly are estimated at a weekly frequency based on quarterly Call Report data.

Following an examination of a commercial bank, the examiner’s conclusions regarding the overall

condition of the bank are summarized in a composite rating assigned in accordance with guide-

lines provided under the Uniform Financial Institution Rating system (referred to as “CAMELS”).