Investor optimism prevails over uncertainty .......................................................................... 1

Bond markets diverge as US yields soar ......................................................................... 2

Box A: Growing uncertainty about terminal rates ........................................................ 4

Equity and credit markets march on .................................................................................. 8

Box B: Negative interest rate swap spreads signal pressure

in government debt absorption .............................................................................. 15

Investor optimism prevails over uncertainty

Despite lingering risks, investor optimism about the near-term outlook set the tone 
for financial markets during the review period.1 The global economy seemed to be 
heading for a smooth landing, and the results of the US presidential election were 
conclusive. As a result, stock markets rose and credit spreads narrowed, easing global 
financial conditions. At the same time, rising government bond yields and an 
appreciating US dollar tightened them, pulling in different directions. Measures of 
risk premia and volatility ticked up in bond markets, amid signs that investors were 
pricing in higher fiscal and (geo-)political risks. However, the markets for risk assets 
mostly shrugged off these uncertainties and sentiment remained positive on balance.

Government bond yields generally rose, especially in the United States. The 
economy’s strength there continued to surprise on the upside, pushing Treasury 
yields higher despite two consecutive policy rate cuts. More subdued activity in 
Europe meant that expectations of future rates were mostly unchanged and yields 
rose by less. Japanese government bond yields edged up as the Bank of Japan 
continued on its gradual path of policy normalisation. Rising US yields went along 
with a surge in the US dollar, a trend that intensified in the wake of the election.

Reemerging concerns about the fiscal situation in several jurisdictions, and 
quantitative tightening in others, added to the upward pressure on yields. Rising term 
premia, (more) negative swap spreads and widening sovereign spreads suggested 
that investors demanded a higher compensation to absorb additional debt supply.

Equity and credit markets posted substantial gains. US stocks reached all-time 
highs following the election, and Chinese stocks surged early in the review period in 
response to stimulus announcements. Elsewhere, stock market performance was 
more subdued. Corporate spreads continued to compress, and in some segments fell 
to multi-year lows. Buoyant risky asset markets counteracted the effect of rising yields 
and a strong US dollar on overall financial conditions. At the same time, there were 
signs that investors remained attuned to downside risks, with the costs of hedging in 
options markets pointing to lingering future uncertainties.

Financial conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs) tightened. With few 
exceptions, equity markets declined, currencies depreciated against the dollar and 
bond yields rose. China’s stimulus announcement resulted in positive, albeit short-
lived, spillovers to equity markets of EMEs with strong trade links to China. In currency 
markets, somewhat higher volatility reduced incentives for currency carry trades.

Slowing growth in China was reflected in depressed commodity prices. The 
impact was stronger in segments such as agricultural commodities and base metals, 
where demand from China is particularly large. Only the prices of gold and silver 
continued to rise, before retreating after the US election, possibly reflecting their 
perceived role as a hedge against geopolitical and inflation risks.

• 
Rapidly rising US yields and a soaring US dollar set the tone for fixed income and currency markets. 
Moves in other core bond markets followed a similar but more muted path, reflecting diverging 
macroeconomic conditions across regions.

• 
Risk-taking continued to be buoyant in equity and particularly credit markets, as investors largely 
shrugged off (geo-)political risks.

• 
EME financial conditions tightened, with higher bond yields, declining equity markets and headwinds 
posed by a stronger dollar.

Over the review period, global fixed income markets resumed their divergence on the 
back of changing perceptions of the future paths of monetary policy and 
macroeconomic outlooks. While readings generally pointed at inflation converging 
towards targets, economic activity indicators painted a varied picture, as substantial 
strength in the United States contrasted with softness elsewhere. Additionally, 
potential concerns about the fiscal positions in some jurisdictions emerged as 
another key driver of bond markets. The US dollar appreciated initially with rising US 
yields and then surged further following the election.

Long-term yields rose across most advanced economies (AEs), led by soaring US 
Treasury yields for most of the review period. Despite the Federal Reserve’s 50 basis 
point rate cut in September, US yields shot up in October. Ten-year Treasury yields 
rose by over 80 basis points from the trough reached on 16 September, before 
retracting somewhat late in the review period. Yields in other AEs followed a similar 
pattern, though with more muted movements overall, particularly in the euro area 
(Graph 1.A). The upward shift in yields initially went alongside a normalisation of the 
yield curve. Term spreads turned positive across AEs and yield curves broadly 
steepened, up until long-term yields retracted somewhat (Graph 1.B).

The macroeconomic backdrop, along with expected monetary policy paths, 
largely underpinned yield movements. Positive macroeconomic surprises continued 
to accumulate in the United States, but were more short-lived elsewhere (Graph 2.A). 
As data releases highlighted a resilient labour market and somewhat persistent 
inflation (Graph 2.B), market participants lifted the expected 2025 path of the federal 
funds rate (Graph 2.C). Further upward revisions took place following the US 
presidential election as markets digested the policy changes which were likely to 
ensue. By the end of the review period, the US term structure flattened again, as near-
term yields rose on expectations of a strong economy and fewer policy rate cuts next 
year. These revisions coincided with signs of increased uncertainty about the level of 
terminal rates (Box A).

Revisions to the expected monetary policy paths and resulting yield movements 
were not as pronounced elsewhere. The macroeconomic backdrop in other major AEs 
was less benign. With weaker growth expected in the euro area in particular, and with 
inflation even falling below target in September, investors priced in larger rate cuts 
by the ECB. In Japan, the central bank signalled that it would continue to normalise 
policy very gradually, as inflation stayed somewhat above target. Long-term Japanese 
government bond yields rose modestly during the review period, reflecting gradual 
policy normalisation by the Bank of Japan.

Growing uncertainty about terminal rates

With inflation on track towards targets and global economic activity remaining strong, central banks began easing the 
policy stance earlier this year. At the same time, the uncertainty over the level at which policy rates will eventually 
settle has been growing. This box documents how disagreement over “terminal rates” has recently evolved, based on 
the views of policymakers and professional forecasters.

Market participants have held a wide range of views about the short- to medium-term monetary policy outlook 
since 2021. At first, as central banks embarked on policy rate hikes, participants wondered how much tightening 
would be necessary to rein in inflation. Subsequently, as inflation started declining steadily, market commentary 
revolved around the question of how long rates would be kept high to ensure plain sailing to targets. More recently, 
as the easing phase began, the debate in markets has shifted towards terminal rates.

The terminal rate can be viewed as the level of the policy rate that is consistent with inflation at target and 
economic activity at potential. As such, it is simply the nominal equivalent of the so-called natural rate of interest, or 
r*. In this sense, steering policy towards the terminal rate means aiming for a neutral policy stance, ie one that is 
neither tight nor loose. Similarly to r*, the terminal rate cannot be observed directly and must be inferred from the 
dynamic interplay of the variables that help define it: policy rates, inflation and economic activity.

The global economy’s apparent resilience despite the sharp policy tightening has led to upward revisions in 
proxies for terminal rates. Even with the caveat that they also reflect term premia, forward rates give a broad sense of 
bond market participants’ view of how future short rates will evolve. A reasonable proxy for the terminal rate is the 
short-term rate expected to prevail five years ahead. Over the past few months, such short-term forward rates rose 
steadily, back to the levels of late 2023 (Graph A1.A). This has been hinting at a shallower easing trajectory and at an 
overall higher level of rates at the end of the loosening phase.

In parallel with an upward shift in expectations of terminal rates, the uncertainty surrounding them also increased. 
One way to gauge this is to consider professional forecasters’ views on the policy stance across different jurisdictions. 
Professional forecasters in surveys are typically not directly asked about their views on policy rates in the long run, but

one can use their expectations on interest rates, inflation and output to gauge their perceptions of the monetary 
policy rule, including the perceived level of neutral nominal rates. This can be done by stripping their short-run 
monetary policy expectations from the component that they ascribe to the cyclical position of the economy, ie their 
short-run expectations on inflation and output. On this basis, the estimated standard deviation of professional 
forecasters’ perceived terminal rates rose across different jurisdictions from 2021 to 2022 in tandem with inflation. It 
then started declining somewhat as inflation receded, but has picked up again since mid-2024 in the euro area, the 
United Kingdom and the United States, even with inflation well on track towards targets (Graph A1.B).

The growing divergence of professional forecasters’ views on terminal rates reflects uncertainty about a variety 
of factors. As argued above, one is the somewhat surprising resilience of economic activity to higher rates. Another 
relates to the outlook of inflation and to the central banks’ expected response to possible future over- or 
undershooting of targets. But disagreement can also reflect higher uncertainty about the speed and strength of the 
transmission of monetary policy to economic activity.

The growing uncertainty among professional forecasters also echoes policymakers’ own diverging views on 
terminal rates. This is evident in the United States, where the future policy rate forecasts of Federal Open Market 
Committee members are regularly disclosed through the Fed dot plot: members’ views of the level of policy rates in 
the long term are a reasonable proxy for expected terminal rates. The upward revisions in those rates that took place 
as the economy repeatedly surprised on the upside coincided with a growing dispersion. At the end of 2023, expected 
terminal rates were still mostly clustered around 2.5%, as they had been two years earlier. By September 2024, the 
range had become substantially wider (Graph A1.C).

The growing divergence in views on terminal rates among both policymakers and professional forecasters 
underscores the challenges central banks face in navigating the current economic waters. Given the associated 
uncertainties, it also highlights the importance of relying on robust monetary policy frameworks.

The US dollar soared and the yen touched lows not seen since late July, but 
developments in fixed income markets only partly explained these movements. The 
dollar appreciated with rising US yields early in the review period, but then surged 
even further on the US election outcome (Graph 3.A), even as US long-term yields 
retracted somewhat. Among AE currencies, the yen depreciated notably vis-à-vis the 
US dollar (Graph 3.B), by some measures in excess of what would be expected based 
on the yield gap in the respective bond markets. Net short positions in yen currency 
futures started rebuilding (Graph 3.C), suggesting investor positioning for further yen 
weakness. Typically, short positions by financial investors, especially hedge funds, 
suggest a rise in yen carry trades. However, this time leveraged funds held a smaller 
share of yen shorts due to increased volatility making such bets riskier (see below). 
Thus, the current positioning may primarily reflect greater currency hedging by asset 
managers holding yen assets.

Some indicators in fixed income markets pointed to greater investor uneasiness. 
For one, the implied volatility of US Treasuries reached the highest level of the year 
(Graph 4.A) before falling sharply following the election. At the long end of the yield 
curve, estimates of the term premium edged up through the review period, indicating 
that investors demanded greater risk compensation for holding long-term US 
government debt (Graph 4.B).2

2 
Model-based estimates indicate that the increase in the term premium was not due to inflation risk, 
which has diminished, but to an increase in the real premium.

Higher measures of risk in fixed income markets coincided with tell-tale signs of 
a possible supply glut of government bonds. Interest rate swap spreads – the swap 
rate minus the government bond yield – fell rapidly, indicating that government 
bonds had become relatively cheaper (and their yields relatively higher). The 
phenomenon was widespread across currencies and maturities, with the euro and 
Japanese yen spreads joining their US counterparts in negative territory, even at those 
shorter maturities where spreads had previously been positive (Graph 4.C). Negative

swap spreads appeared to reflect pressures on investors and intermediaries due to 
the need to absorb more government debt supply in the near future (Box B).

Conditions in short-term funding markets over the review period reflected 
ongoing quantitative tightening and an increasing shift towards a relative abundance 
of collateral. In the United States, repo spreads – defined here as the difference 
between the rate on an overnight repo and the effective federal funds rate – spiked 
on a few occasions, most notably in September (Graph 5.A). This seemingly reflected 
the greater repo financing needed to absorb large Treasury issuance as well as 
constraints on dealers’ balance sheets linked to end-of-quarter regulatory reporting 
pressures. Repo spreads in Japan, while still negative, showed signs of normalisation 
in recent months (Graph 5.B), pointing to government collateral becoming less scarce, 
despite still very ample liquidity. In the euro area too, the reversal of collateral scarcity 
drove repo rates higher.3 Large sovereign issuance and a dwindling ECB footprint 
contributed to the gradual increase in repo rates over the past 18 months. This shift 
was also visible in the rapid reduction in take-up of the ECB Securities Lending 
Programme, particularly against cash collateral (Graph 5.C): investors had less need 
to turn to the central bank as they were able to obtain collateral from other sources.

Several indicators pointed to the re-emergence of fiscal concerns. US sovereign 
credit default swap (CDS) spreads widened in advance of the November presidential 
and congressional elections, amid worries about the fiscal implications of the 
uncertain outcomes (Graph 6.A). The subsequent narrowing may have reflected a 
drop in the likelihood of another debt ceiling impasse, as the next president’s party 
gained a congressional majority. In the euro area, French sovereign spreads remained 
elevated (Graph 6.B), as the newly appointed government announced larger than

3 
The abundance of collateral is reflected in higher repo rates as lenders demand a higher rate of 
interest to lend cash against collateral, such as government bonds.

Fiscal concerns become a greater focal point

expected fiscal deficits, while its ability to command a majority in parliament was itself 
in doubt. The fiscal outlook also appeared expansionary in Japan on the back of the 
October parliamentary election results. And it became so in the United Kingdom, 
where the government announced a relaxation of fiscal rules and more borrowing. 
This sent yields on gilts higher relative to a synthetic benchmark based on German 
bunds (expressed in the same currency by using FX swaps to convert the yield in euros 
into a gilt-equivalent yield) (Graph 6.C).

Equity and credit markets were undeterred by political and fiscal risks, posting gains 
as the global economy continued to show strength. Corporate spreads compressed 
further, even in the euro area and in Asian markets, where the growth outlook was 
more mixed. The credit spread compression counteracted the effect of rising 
government bond yields and a stronger US dollar on overall financial conditions. At 
the same time, investors appeared to be more attuned to downside risks, at least in 
equity markets, with the VIX lingering at higher levels following the August 
turbulence, before retreating somewhat after the US election.

Stock market performance varied significantly across major economies. US 
equities recorded fresh highs (Graph 7.A), as market valuations were buoyed by the 
Federal Reserve’s 50 basis point September rate cut and by the economy’s strength. 
Stocks, especially small caps, shot up further on 6 November once the outcome of 
the US election became clear. Bitcoin followed a similar pattern, reaching all-time 
highs. Across the Atlantic, the more subdued performance of major European equity 
markets was in line with the relatively weaker economy. Expected earnings for 
European-listed companies deteriorated further and trailed those of their US peers

by a significant margin (Graph 7.B). To some extent, their relative weakness also 
reflected a greater weight of more cyclical industrial and energy stocks in the index.

In China, equities rose substantially following the announcement of a large policy 
stimulus package in late September. That said, the impact on earnings expectations 
was more muted, as authorities released information on the content of the package 
in batches. Following the initial jump, Chinese equities moved mostly sideways.

Notwithstanding the large gains of US equity indices, investors appeared to be 
growing warier of potential risks. After the volatility of early August subsided, the VIX 
continued to fluctuate within higher ranges (Graph 7.C). It then retreated as the (near-
term) uncertainty surrounding the US election was resolved. However, the term 
structure of the VIX became upward sloping again, with higher expected medium-
term volatility.

Conditions in credit markets around the globe remained unusually 
accommodative. Corporate credit spreads stayed compressed relative to their 
historical watermarks, in both the investment grade and high-yield segments 
(Graphs 8.A and 8.B), in some cases reaching lows not seen since the mid-2000s. 
Indeed, some analysts started referring to conditions in corporate funding markets as 
the “valuation conundrum”.

Several underlying forces appeared to put a lid on corporate spreads. For one, 
debt default rates moderated in the United States (Graph 8.C). Furthermore, 
corporates’ immediate refinancing needs subsided as the maturity wall was pushed 
out until late 2025–26. In addition, US corporate debt markets continued to see 
strong foreign demand, with almost two years of consecutive net foreign purchases, 
according to Treasury International Capital data. Finally, compressed spreads also 
reflected higher government bond yields rather than lower corporate yields.

Bank lending conditions eased amid a surge in bank equity prices in the United 
States. Stock prices of banks began to rally following the September policy rate cut, 
especially for regional banks with large commercial real estate (CRE) portfolios. The 
outperformance of CRE-exposed banks reflected shifting investor sentiment towards

risk in the sector (Graph 9.A). Bank stock prices rose further after the US presidential 
election, as investors looked to some regulatory easing. Rising stock prices went hand 
in hand with easing lending standards (Graph 9.B); declining non-performing loan 
ratios supported this shift in both the United States and Europe.

EMEs faced headwinds and financial conditions tightened. With few exceptions, 
equity markets declined, currencies depreciated and bond yields rose. China’s 
stimulus announcement caused visible, albeit short-lived, positive spillovers to equity 
markets of EMEs with stronger trade links to China. Some EME currencies also 
depreciated on domestic political and fiscal uncertainties.

Bond yields in EMEs diverged across regions, reflecting differences in the macro 
backdrop, monetary policy cycles and exposure to US developments. Yields in major 
Latin American economies increased notably (Graph 10.A), tracking their US 
counterparts more closely than those in other EMEs. Bond yields in Mexico proved 
especially sensitive to US developments, while those in Brazil reflected mainly strong 
domestic economic activity and monetary tightening amid rising inflationary 
pressures. Most Latin American countries also maintained an expansionary fiscal 
stance, putting further upward pressure on yields. In emerging Asia, by contrast, many 
central banks cut policy rates for the first time in the cycle and yields rose substantially 
less. At the end of the spectrum, Chinese government bond yields stayed low, amid 
subdued growth and policy easing.

EME currencies generally depreciated against the greenback, while their volatility 
increased. The depreciation was particularly large for Latin American currencies. The 
Mexican peso depreciated further on the likelihood of trade tariffs under the new US 
administration (Graph 10.B). The Brazilian real tumbled in December as the highly 
anticipated measures to curb public spending were thrown into doubt. In Asia-Pacific, 
the Korean won was briefly shaken by a bout of domestic political instability. Still, 
while EME currency volatility picked up in October (Graph 10.C), it decreased 
somewhat for most EME currencies with the US election results, in line with retreating 
near-term implied volatility in other markets.

Higher volatility in foreign exchange markets during the review period reduced 
the incentive for carry traders to rebuild their positions following the August unwind. 
Carry-to-risk ratios declined substantially, and mostly because of the increase in 
volatility (Graph 11.A). Furthermore, option-implied measures of skewness showed 
that investors have grown warier of the potential downside risks associated with these 
strategies: jurisdictions with the highest interest rate differential to the United States 
are those where the currency depreciation risk is higher (Graph 11.B).

EMEs with strong links to China saw their equity markets benefit from the 
Chinese government’s stimulus announcement. Following China’s stock market jump, 
which erased more than a year of losses in a single day (Graph 12.A), other markets 
quickly followed suit. The impact was especially noticeable in Brazil and some other 
Latin American commodity exporters such as Chile. Within emerging Asia, the Korean 
and Thai stock markets were among the most affected. However, such spillovers were 
short-lived, and EME equity indices declined rapidly thereafter.

Stronger macroeconomic headwinds in China were also a key driver of 
commodity prices. The prices of agricultural commodities remained low, despite a 
brief surge at the time of the stimulus announcement. Oil prices were flat over the 
review period, notwithstanding a severe escalation of hostilities in the Middle East in 
October (Graph 13.A). Except for the price of iron ore, which did rise with the 
announcement, those of industrial metals also declined. Only gold and silver 
continued to climb, possibly reflecting geopolitical risks, but their prices then sank in 
the weeks following the US election (Graph 13.B).

On balance, the outcome in EMEs of rising yields, depreciating currencies and 
declining stock markets was a tightening of financial conditions. The tightening was 
overall much larger than in AEs and the United States in particular (Graph 13.C).

Negative interest rate swap spreads signal pressure in government debt absorption

1 Monthly averages of daily values. 2 Swap rates, and hence swap spreads, are lower when the floating rates are indexed to risk-free rates 
because the latter are overnight, so virtually risk-free. The effect is larger for US dollar swaps, because the RFR is a collateralised rate.

Swap spreads in US dollars were negative for some time post-Great Financial Crisis (Graph B1) but have become 
more persistent even at 10-year tenors (Graph B1.B). More recently, negative swap spreads have also become more 
common in other major currencies, such as the euro and Japanese yen (Graph B1.D). Negative swap spreads, at least 
in theory, represent an arbitrage opportunity, and should therefore be quickly brought back to zero. Market 
participants could exploit a negative swap spread by holding a government bond funded through repo, paying the 
fixed rate in the swap and earning the floating, thus pocketing the difference between these rates.

Negative swap spreads are not arbitraged away because they capture intermediation costs rather than a “free 
lunch”. Negative spreads compensate intermediaries for holding government bonds on their balance sheets and 
entering swaps as fixed rate payers. Both swap and bond markets are intermediated by bank-affiliated dealers who 
require remuneration for using their balance sheets and taking on associated risks. When dealers absorb a large 
amount of bonds, they incur funding costs in the repo market for financing the long bond position. Additionally, they

tend to hedge the interest rate risk by paying the fixed swap rate and receiving the floating rate. When doing so, 
dealers also need to factor in balance sheet costs from internal risk management and prudential rules, as well as 
opportunity costs of other uses of their balance sheet capacity. If these costs are high enough, dealers will recoup 
them through a negative swap spread. Moreover, if dealer balance sheets are constrained, non-bank players such as 
hedge funds may need to be incentivised to step in, deploying repo leverage to assume similar positions as dealers.

A. Higher yields reflect “soft” 
auctions

Downward pressure on swap spreads can originate either from a greater supply of government bonds in cash 
markets or a greater demand to receive the fixed rate in swap markets. In cash bond markets, investors’ inability or 
unwillingness to absorb debt issuance or sales by other bond holders at prevailing prices exerts upward pressure on 
bond yields, pushing swap spreads lower. In swap markets, asset managers, institutional investors and corporate debt 
issuers are typical receivers of the fixed rate in the swap. The greater these players’ demand to receive the fixed rate, 
the greater the downward pressure on swap rates and hence swap spreads.

In recent months, pressure points primarily originating in the cash bond markets have caused noticeable 
imbalances in supply and demand. Recent Treasury auction results underscore this, with some monthly auctions 
clearing at a higher yield (lower price) than expected since 2022 (Graph B2.A). These “soft” auction results reflect 
investors’ lukewarm interest in absorbing the supply of government debt and that dealer bond inventories have 
swollen to record levels this year (Graph B2.B).

Negative swap spreads have also emerged more recently in the euro area and Japan. A common driver with the 
United States is the additional expected bond issuance given the upward trajectory in debt supply. But jurisdiction-
specific drivers are also at play. For one, as the euro area and Japanese central banks embarked on quantitative 
tightening (QT), expectations that the private sector would need to play a bigger marginal role in absorption pushed 
bond yields higher, compressing swap spreads. The 30-year yen swap spread dropped into deeply negative territory 
in April, when the Bank of Japan announced the exit from its ultra-loose balance sheet policy. The spread then 
decompressed in July, when the central bank revealed that the pace of QT would be slower than previously expected. 
In the euro area, swap spreads tumbled in October, as QT’s effects were felt in markets via pressure on bond yields. 
And the steep fall in euro swap spreads coincided with a drop in the demand to tap the ECB Securities Lending Facility 
to source collateral (see main text) – a sign that government bond collateral in private hands was no longer scarce.

Another common driver of swap spreads has been the rise in funding costs in repo markets as central banks 
abandoned negative policy rates. In this case, the ECB was ahead of the Bank of Japan by almost two years 
(Graph B2.C). Since then, dealers have had to pay positive repo rates to fund their long positions in government bonds. 
Furthermore, the relative abundance of government bond collateral, due to increased issuance and less central bank 
heft, has put additional upward pressure on repo rates.

The shift away from Libor mechanically lowered swap spreads

Finally, there are technical reasons for more negative swap spreads, notably the shift in reference rates in swaps 
away from Libor benchmark interest rates to so-called risk-free rates. Before the switch away from Libor, the swap rate 
was the fair price at inception of a series of expected future rates that embodied credit risk. Now that swap contracts 
are referenced to (nearly) risk-free rates in the floating leg, the swap rate itself is lower, which means that swap spreads 
also will be lower or more negative (Graphs B1.B and B1.D). In fact, the emergence of negative spreads at shorter 
tenors (eg two years) is mainly due to the shift towards risk-free benchmarks following the cessation of Libor 
(Graph B3). Benchmarks based on collateralised rates, such as the secured overnight financing rate (SOFR), result in 
even lower swap rates, and thus more negative swap spreads (Graph B3.A). SOFR-based spreads will also be influenced 
by repo market developments, as seen in the March 2020 dash for cash episode., 

This feature documents that central banks operating under inflation targeting or similar regimes 
have in practice pursued their objectives in a targeted manner in the sense that they have reacted 
more forcefully to demand-driven than to supply-driven inflation. This new finding comes from 
the estimation of Taylor-type monetary policy rules for seven major advanced economies. The 
estimated targeted response aligns with both monetary theory prescriptions and central banks’ 
doctrine as reflected in their official statements. Our analysis further suggests that during the 
post-pandemic inflation surge, policy rates were initially slow to respond but eventually caught 
up with the levels predicted by the targeted Taylor rules.

Mainstream monetary theory prescribes an asymmetric response to fluctuations in 
inflation, depending on their underlying drivers. If inflation stems from demand 
factors, the theory calls for a strong response to stabilise both inflation and output. 
By contrast, if inflation is due to supply factors, the central bank should give more 
weight to economic activity and partly “look through” associated inflationary 
pressures as long as inflation expectations remain firmly anchored (eg Erceg et 
al (2000); Bodenstein et al (2008)).

The doctrine of central banks operating under flexible inflation targeting or 
similar regimes reflects these principles. Central banks commonly acknowledge a 
more muted response to supply-driven inflation due to the often transitory nature of 
underlying shocks and to the induced macroeconomic trade-offs. As supply shocks 
push prices and output in opposite directions, central banks tend to respond more 
mildly to supply-driven inflationary (disinflationary) pressures to avoid reinforcing 
economic downturns (overheating). Central banks’ common approach to 
accommodate supply-driven (dis)inflation underpins their medium-term price 
stability objectives.

• 
Over recent decades, central banks in advanced economies have responded much more strongly to 
demand- than to supply-driven inflation as gleaned from estimated targeted Taylor rules.

• 
This new finding corroborates both prescriptions of monetary theory and central bank doctrine as 
reflected in official statements.

• 
During the post-pandemic inflation surge, policy rates were initially slow to respond but eventually 
caught up with the levels predicted by the targeted Taylor rules.

That said, conventional policy rules used to describe monetary policy reaction 
functions do not account for this asymmetric response. Instead, these rules essentially 
assume that policy rates respond to inflation in a uniform way irrespective of its 
underlying drivers (eg Taylor (1993); Clarida et al (2000); Smets and Wouters (2007)). 
In more refined versions of such rules, the lack of response to supply shocks due to 
their transitory nature is sometimes taken into account by formulating the policy rule 
in terms of core inflation (Carvalho et al (2021)) or an inflation forecast 
(Svensson (1997)).

This special feature bridges the gap between theory and doctrine on the one 
hand and the conventional description of policy reaction functions on the other.2 We 
do so by estimating targeted Taylor rules that allow for different (targeted) responses 
to demand- and supply-driven inflation. To achieve this, we build on recent 
contributions by Shapiro (2022) and Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022) that disentangle 
the demand and supply factors underlying observable inflation dynamics. These 
approaches identify the time series of demand- and supply-driven inflation based on 
the basic conceptual consideration that a demand shock moves inflation and output

2 
The present analysis extends the empirical analysis in Hofmann et al (2024) by providing evidence 
beyond the United States. See the latter reference for a discussion of the implications of our results 
for the transmission of business cycle shocks and normative aspects pertaining to targeted versus 
conventional (unconditional) Taylor rules.

in the same direction, while a supply shock moves them in opposite directions. The 
resulting time series of demand- and supply-driven inflation highlight the changes in 
inflation drivers over time and, notably, reveal that the post-Covid-19 pandemic 
inflation surge was due to both demand and supply factors (Graph 1). We use these 
time series to estimate targeted Taylor rules for seven major jurisdictions (Australia, 
Canada, the euro area, Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States) 
over periods when these economies operated price stability-oriented monetary 
policy regimes such as flexible inflation targeting.

Our core finding is that central banks have responded strongly to demand-driven 
inflation, and only weakly, if at all, to supply-driven inflation. For our baseline sample, 
the estimated response to demand-driven inflation is more than four times greater 
than that to supply-driven inflation. The difference is both statistically and 
economically significant. Thus, our findings suggest that central banks have pursued 
their price stability mandates in a targeted fashion, very much in line with both the 
prescriptions of monetary theory and central bank doctrine. Our results also imply 
that conventional monetary policy reaction functions are mis-specified, essentially 
estimating an average of the strong reaction of central banks to demand-driven 
inflation and their muted reaction to supply-driven inflation.

The feature proceeds as follows. The first section reviews the prescriptions of 
monetary theory and the central bank doctrine on how monetary policy should 
respond to demand- and supply-driven inflation. The second section describes the 
empirical analysis and compares our estimates of targeted Taylor rules to those of 
conventional Taylor rules. The third section sheds some new light on central bank 
responses during the post-pandemic inflation surge through the lens of our novel 
estimated targeted Taylor rules. The final section concludes and discusses potential 
challenges ahead for targeted policy reaction functions.

Several theoretical considerations call for a more muted policy response to supply- 
than to demand-driven inflation. At the same time, official central bank 
communication suggests that these considerations also underpin central banks’ 
doctrine with respect to interest rate setting.

Two main reasons justify an asymmetric response to demand- versus supply-driven 
inflation.

First, certain types of supply shocks, like supply-driven commodity price shocks, 
tend to be transitory (Avalos et al (2025)). Despite their significant short-term impact 
on headline inflation, these shocks typically do not lead to persistently higher inflation 
(unless they induce large second-round effects on prices in other economic sectors). 
Because of long monetary policy transmission lags, responding to the uptick in 
inflation caused by such transient disturbances would be destabilising. By the time 
monetary policy would start to have traction, typically with a lag of 12 months or 
more, the effects of the shock on inflation would have largely subsided. Thus, reacting 
to the inflationary effects of such shocks would end up pushing inflation down too 
late and might risk unnecessarily weakening the economy (Mishkin (2007); Bandera 
et al (2023); Guerrieri et al (2023)).

A second reason for “looking through” supply-driven inflation arises from the 
specific stabilisation trade-off between inflation and real activity associated with 
supply shocks.3 This can be illustrated with a simple aggregate demand (AD)–
aggregate supply (AS) diagram (Graph 2). An inflationary demand shock (Graph 2.A) 
pushes both economic activity and prices up, ie in the same direction (shift of AD 
from (a) to (b)). Tighter monetary policy can thus counteract the shock’s effects, 
essentially shifting the demand curve back (AD shift from (b) to (a)).4 By contrast, a 
supply shock (Graph 2.B) gives rise to a trade-off between stabilising inflation or 
output. Specifically, an inflationary supply shock shifts the aggregate supply curve up 
and to the left, pushing prices up and output down (AS shift from (c) to (d)).5 When 
monetary policy tightens to contain the rise in prices, aggregate demand shifts to the 
left from AD1 to AD2, reducing output even further and potentially leading to a 
severe recession (AD shift from (d) to (e)). For this reason, in standard macroeconomic 
models, the response of monetary policy to inflationary supply shocks is to tighten, 
but not as much as for demand shocks, especially if there is a chance that the shock 
itself (or its impact on inflation) is temporary (eg Erceg et al (2000); Blanchard and 
Galí (2007); Bodenstein et al (2008)).6

3 
This is the macroeconomic stabilisation trade-off applying to business cycle frequency. Central banks 
may face an additional trade-off applying to lower time frequencies between price stability and 
financial stability. It may arise in particular from very persistent favourable supply shocks and may 
constitute a third reason to look through supply-driven inflation (see Borio (2006) for the case of the 
disinflationary effects of globalisation).

4 
The lack of a trade-off between stabilising inflation and stabilising output around its desired level is 
known in the literature as the “divine coincidence” (Blanchard and Galí (2007)). According to 
monetary theory, this property generally holds for demand shocks, but not for supply shocks 
(Galí (2015)).

5 
Typical inflationary supply shocks are increases in markups or in the price of energy, or decreases in 
the pace of productivity.

6 
The same logic applies to disinflationary supply shocks (eg an acceleration of productivity or a 
decrease in the price of energy), which push output up and inflation down potentially below target.

A necessary condition for central banks’ ability to look through is that longer-
term inflation expectations are firmly anchored to central banks’ inflation targets. Well 
anchored inflation expectations limit the risk that the initial impact of supply shocks 
is amplified through wider price and wage adjustments, preventing supply-driven 
inflation from turning into wage-price spirals. By contrast, when there is a risk that 
inflation expectations de-anchor, central banks are called upon to react forcefully to 
inflation irrespective of its underlying drivers (eg Reis (2022); Bandera et al (2023)).7

short-lived and inflation expectations remain anchored (RBA (2023)). 
• 
Life is more complicated in a world of supply shocks; an adverse supply shock increases inflation 
and reduces output and employment (Lowe (2022)). 
• 
If inflation expectations do increase and wage- and price-setting behaviour responds to the 
higher inflation, an interest rate response is required (Lowe (2023)).

Bank of England 
• 
The orthodox monetary response to a global shock to energy prices is to “look through” them. 
• 
When the economy is hit by temporary cost shocks, policymakers face a trade-off [between] 
output and inflation (Tenreyro (2022)). 
• 
If inflation expectations drift away, monetary policy needs to lean against inertia to return 
inflation to target (Bandera et al (2023)).

Federal Reserve Board 
• 
Standard monetary prescription is to "look through" commodities price shocks (Brainard (2022)). 
• 
The response to the inflationary effects of supply shocks should be attenuated. Supply shocks 
tend to move prices and employment in opposite directions (Powell (2023)). 
• 
Supply shocks that drive inflation high enough can affect the longer-term inflation expectations. 
Monetary policy must forthrightly address risks of de-anchoring of expectations (Powell (2023)).

European Central Bank 
• 
When faced with supply shocks, central banks can, in principle, “look through” them, as these 
shocks will usually leave no lasting imprint on inflation. 
• 
The appropriate policy response will depend on the type of shock. For a supply shock, price 
stability may conflict with the contractionary impact of the shock. (Papademos (2003)). 
• 
In situations where inflation expectations can de-anchor, central banks must then react 
forcefully to prevent above-target inflation becoming entrenched (Lagarde (2024)).

Bank of Canada 
• 
The bank’s framework for inflation targeting allows temporary supply shocks to be largely 
ignored, as long as they do not feed into inflation expectations (Dodge (2002)). 
• 
Supply shocks present central banks with a difficult trade-off between growth and inflation. We 
focus on balancing the upside risks to inflation with the downside risks to growth 
(Macklem (2024)).

Sveriges Riksbank 
• 
Supply shocks such as shortage of snow that restricted the supply of hydroelectric power can 
occasion deviations from the inflation target (Bäckström (2002)). 
• 
Supply shocks present a challenge: policymakers want to prevent inflation from becoming 
entrenched at a high level but want to avoid exacerbating the downturn. (Thedéen (2023)). 
• 
If there is a risk that inflation exceeds 2 percent for a long time, a tighter monetary policy may 
be necessary to maintain confidence in the inflation target (Löf and Stockhammar (2024)).

Bank of Korea 
• 
If inflation is projected to exceed the target but the real sector faces supply shocks, the central 
bank should decide whether to adjust interest rates to ensure price stability (Bank of 
Korea (2017)).

Sources: Central bank statements; authors’ elaboration.

In that case, monetary policy would loosen but not as much as in case of a disinflationary demand 
shock, as in the case of the latter output is below its potential.

7 
See also Maechler (2024) for a recent discussion of this point.

Central bank doctrine – according to central bank official statements – aligns with 
these conceptual prescriptions (Table 1). All of the seven central banks included in 
our analysis refer to the transitory nature of many supply shocks and to the 
stabilisation trade-offs between inflation and real activity associated with such shocks 
as reasons to at least partially look through them. They also typically refer to the 
anchoring of inflation expectations as a precondition for their ability to do so.

Are the prescriptions of monetary theory and the stated central bank doctrine also 
reflected in practice, ie in the actual conduct of monetary policy? If this were the case, 
the monetary policy response to demand-driven inflation would be measurably 
stronger than that to supply-driven inflation. This is an empirical question, which we 
address by estimating monetary policy reaction functions.

Our analysis draws on recent empirical contributions providing a decomposition 
of inflation into demand- and supply-driven components. Specifically, we use the 
decompositions of inflation based on the methods proposed by Shapiro (2022) for 
Australia, Canada, Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States, and by 
Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022) for the euro area; see Box A for details.8

We determine the sample period according to the availability of the inflation 
decomposition and the beginning of price stability-focused monetary policy regimes 
in each of the seven jurisdictions covered by our analysis. Our sample includes 
observations starting in the third quarter of 1979 (when Paul Volcker was appointed 
Chair of the Federal Reserve) for the United States, post-2002 for the euro area, post-
2000 for the United Kingdom and post-1999 for the other jurisdictions. The sample 
ends with the most recently available observation, respectively, ranging between the 
second quarter of 2024 for the US and the first quarter of 2023 for Korea (see annex 
B for details). To address the challenge posed by the (proximity to the) zero lower 
bound, we include in our baseline specification only observations for which the policy 
rate was above 0.5%.9

8 
The analysis covers the seven jurisdictions for which such decompositions are available. In the case 
of the United States, for which both decompositions are available, we use the series derived with the 
method in Shapiro (2022) as our baseline, and then check that our findings carry through when using 
the series based on the method in Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022).

9 
Our findings also hold if we use Wu and Xia (2016) shadow rates when available (for the US, the euro 
area and the UK). Under this specification, the estimated coefficient of demand-driven inflation is 
slightly higher compared with our baseline, while that of supply-driven inflation does not materially 
change. Moreover, we assessed the sensitivity of the results to the calibration of the threshold for 
the lower bound. When choosing a lower bound below 0.5% under our baseline specification, the 
estimated monetary policy responses to demand-driven and supply-driven inflation slightly 
decrease, consistent with the limited policy space characterising the additional observations included 
in the estimations in these cases compared with our baseline. These results are available upon 
request.

Box A 
Decomposing inflation into demand and supply components

To decompose inflation into its demand- and supply-driven components, we primarily rely on the approach of 
Shapiro (2022), complemented with that of Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022). Both methods are based on sign 
restrictions motivated by a standard supply and demand framework. That is, changes in supply move inflation 
and output in opposite directions, while changes in demand move both variables in the same direction.

Shapiro (2022) decomposes personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation in two time series, the 
supply- and demand-driven contributions, which quantify the degree to which either demand or supply is 
driving inflation in each month. The identification relies on the signs of the residuals from separate price and 
quantity regressions for each of the more than 100 goods and services categories in the PCE price index. 
Specifically, for each category current price (quantity) levels are regressed on their own lagged values and 
lagged values of quantity (price) levels. Categories for which the residuals of the two regressions have the same 
sign in a given month are classified as subject to a demand shock in that month; the corresponding price change 
is then labelled as demand-driven. By contrast, categories with residuals of opposite signs in a given month are 
classified as subject to a supply shock in that month; the corresponding price change is then labelled as supply-
driven. The demand-driven (supply-driven) contribution to inflation in a given month is then measured as the 
expenditure-weighted average of the price changes of those categories labelled as demand-driven (supply-
driven) in that month. Decompositions from the Shapiro approach are available for the Australia, Canada, Korea, 
Sweden, the United Kingdom and United States, but not for the euro area.

Demand/supply inflation decomposition for the US

Headline inflation, year on year, in per cent 
Graph A1

A. Shapiro (2022)1 
 B. Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022)2

1 Quarterly average of monthly series. 2 The original Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022) inflation decomposition is expressed in quarter-on-
quarter changes, and refers to standardised inflation series. For our estimations, we use the mean and standard deviation of the aggregate 
inflation series to back out the demand and supply components of inflation, and then express those two components as year-on-year changes.

Sources: Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022); Shapiro (2022); authors’ calculations.

We complement the data from the Shapiro approach with the demand-supply inflation decomposition for 
the euro area based on Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022). This approach estimates indicators of demand- and 
supply-driven inflation based on a factor model using more than 140 quarterly time series of inflation and real 
activity measures. The estimation relies on imposing sign restrictions on factor loadings. Supply is identified as 
a factor that loads negatively on inflation and positively on economic activity; demand, in turn, is identified as a 
factor that loads positively on both inflation and economic activity.

While the two approaches are different, they yield broadly similar decompositions of inflation into demand 
and supply components. This is what a comparison suggests for the United States, the only economy for which 
both decompositions are available (Graph A.1). For instance, for the post-pandemic inflation surge, the two 
decompositions indicate that both demand and supply forces contributed to the inflation surge, with the 
Shapiro approach attributing a somewhat larger role to supply factors. More generally, the correlation 
coefficient of the demand (supply) series derived with the two methods is in the ballpark of 86% and is highly 
statistically significant.

We consider two empirical specifications of the Taylor rule: a conventional one 
(our benchmark) whereby the central bank is assumed to care about fluctuations in 
inflation and real activity, and a targeted one, which allows for a different response 
to the demand- and supply-driven components of inflation.

The benchmark specification for the monetary policy reaction function – as 
described by a conventional Taylor rule with interest rate smoothing, takes the 
following form:

𝑖௧= 𝑖+ ρ𝑖௧ିଵ+ ሺ1 −ρሻሾαπ୲+ β 𝑦୲ሿ+ ε୲ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)

where it is the (annualised) policy rate in quarter t, πt is (year-on-year) inflation, 𝑦୲ is 
the output gap10 and 𝑖 is a constant reflecting the long-term level of interest 
rates.11 The lagged interest rate 𝑖௧ିଵ captures central banks’ proclivity for smoothing 
adjustments in the policy rate over time.

The targeted Taylor rule is an extension of the benchmark specification in (1), in 
which we replace overall inflation πt with its demand- and supply-driven components 
π୲

11 
In the simplified way the Talyor rule is specified in equation (1), the constant i is an amalgam of the 
long-term level of the real interest rate, the central bank’s inflation target and the model parameters.

The results strongly support the targeted specification of the Taylor rule. For the 
standard Taylor rule from equation (1), the estimated inflation coefficient (α) equals 
1.39, while that of the output gap (β) equals 1.35 (Graph 3.A). The coefficient of 
inflation is slightly below that prescribed by the original Taylor (1993) rule (1.38 
instead of 1.5), while that of the output gap is higher (1.35 instead of 0.5) consistent 
with recent estimates for the post-Volcker period.13 However, the estimates of the 
targeted specification of the Taylor rule from equation (2) suggest that there is a 
significant difference in the response to demand- versus supply-driven inflation 
(Graph 3.B). Notably, central banks appear to respond more forcefully to demand- 
than to supply-driven inflation (more than fourfold, 3.26 versus 0.77). The difference 
is both statistically and economically significant.

Individual estimates at the jurisdiction level of the conventional Taylor rule 
(Graph 4.A) and of the targeted Taylor rule (Graph 4.B) confirm this result. In 
particular, for the targeted Taylor rule the interquartile range of individual responses 
to demand-driven inflation ranges from 1.5 to 4.1 and lies on top of that of supply-
driven inflation which ranges from –0.47 to 1.03.

How do our targeted Taylor rules compare with alternative ways of capturing the 
dependence of the monetary policy response on the underlying drivers of inflation? 
A common approach to model such a dependence is to specify the monetary policy 
reaction function in terms of core and non-core inflation, with the former capturing

developments in underlying inflation and the latter more transitory inflation 
fluctuations. There are different approaches to estimating core inflation (and non-
core as the residual to headline inflation). One simple approach is to measure non-
core inflation as the rate of change in the energy and food components of the 
consumer price index, and core inflation as the rate of change of the remainder of 
the index. To the extent that food and energy price changes are more transitory and 
often supply-driven, while underlying core inflation may often reflect primarily 
demand conditions, the core versus non-core inflation distinction may capture similar 
aspects as our demand- versus supply-driven inflation distinction.

The coefficients αc,d and α𝑐,𝑠 are now the coefficients on the demand and supply 
components of core inflation.

The results reported in Graph 5 suggest that the distinction between core and 
non-core inflation does not capture the distinction between demand- and supply-
driven inflation. We find that the Federal Reserve responded strongly to core inflation, 
with a response coefficient of above 2, while it essentially ignored the energy and

food price changes (Graph 5.A), consistent with the pattern found for a broader group 
of advanced economies in Avalos et al (2025). However, the estimates of equation (4) 
suggest that the response to demand-driven fluctuations of core inflation was about 
three times stronger than that to supply-driven fluctuations (Graph 5.B). Thus, our 
result that the central bank reacted more strongly to demand-driven fluctuations in 
inflation holds also when focusing on core inflation.14

What does our analysis have to say about the monetary policy reaction to the post-
pandemic inflation surge? To answer this question, we compare the observed path of 
policy rates with those implied by the estimated targeted Taylor rules since the 
beginning of the inflation surge. The latter corresponds, for each jurisdiction, to the 
first quarter after Q3 2020 when inflation exceeded 2%.

The results of this exercise suggest that policy rates were initially slow to respond 
to inflation but then rapidly caught up with the levels implied by the estimated Taylor 
rules. Central banks set policy rates at lower levels than those predicted by the 
estimated rule in the first four quarters of the inflation surge (Graph 6.A, blue bars). 
By the fourth quarter, the policy rate was more than 50 basis points below the implied 
rate in half of the jurisdictions in focus. Subsequently, as both supply- and demand 
driven inflation took hold (red and blue line, respectively), central banks tightened 
more forcefully, bringing policy rates up to, and eventually even above, levels 
consistent with the targeted Taylor rules.

The initial slow reaction may at least partly reflect an initial misdiagnosis that the 
increase in inflation was primarily supply-driven at that stage, so that central banks 
could look through it.15 Indeed, in late 2020 and throughout 2021 policy rates were 
close to the level implied by the estimated targeted rule if inflation were exclusively 
supply-driven (Graph 6.A, red line). However, there was a significant demand-driven 
component, reflected in the considerably higher level of policy rates predicted by the 
estimated targeted Taylor rules based on the actual decomposition of inflation (Graph 
6.B, yellow line).

14 
We also checked whether the strong estimated response to demand-driven inflation is not 
equivalent to reacting to the inflation forecast. We add the consensus inflation forecast as an 
additional regressor in equation (2) and obtain highly statistically significant coefficients for all terms 
in our regressions, with the coefficient of supply-driven inflation turning negative. These results 
suggest that central banks account for both contemporaneous inflation and its forecast, and that 
everything else equal, react less when contemporaneous supply-driven inflation is high. This is 
consistent with central banks’ concern of stabilisation trade-off between inflation and real activity in 
those latter cases. The results are available upon request.

15 
Other complementary explanations could also be relevant. One such example is that central banks 
delivered on the promises made under forward guidance (or flexible average inflation targeting in 
the United States) to overshot inflation targets once exiting the zero lower bound.

The analysis in this special feature suggests that central banks operating under 
inflation targeting or similar regimes have conducted policy in a “targeted” manner. 
They did so by responding strongly to demand-driven inflation, but only mildly to 
supply-driven inflation. These findings are consistent with both central bank doctrine 
and the prescriptions of the prevailing monetary theory paradigm. They also suggest 
that conventional monetary policy reaction functions commonly used in academic 
research and central bank analytical models which assume a one-size-fits-all policy 
with respect to inflation are mis-specified.

An important question concerns the feasibility of targeted Taylor rules as a guide 
to monetary policy in real time. The measures of demand- and supply-driven inflation 
we have used became available only recently. Our findings therefore imply that 
central banks were able to infer similar information about the supply- versus demand-
driven nature of inflation from their indicators, analytical toolboxes and judgment. 
However, the finding of a potential misdiagnosis of the nature of inflation at the 
beginning of the inflation surge suggests that this inference can be difficult in real-
time conditions. The availability of the new indicators of demand- and supply-driven

inflation could help mitigate this problem as they seem to have provided quite 
reliable decompositions in real time.16

Going forward, greater supply headwinds may force central banks to react more 
forcefully to supply disturbances to ensure inflation expectations stay firmly 
anchored. This may, in turn, constrain central banks’ ability to conduct their policy in 
a targeted fashion. As recently highlighted by the central bank community 
(eg Bandera et al (2023); Maechler (2024)), geopolitical tensions and climate change 
could lead to larger, more frequent and more persistent adverse supply disturbances. 
At the same time, ageing populations and deglobalisation may render the supply side 
of the economy less elastic, magnifying the effect of business cycle shocks on 
inflation, irrespectively of their nature. If such changes materialise, they will call for a 
stronger reaction to supply-driven inflation to curb the second-round effects of 
supply shocks and prevent a de-anchoring of inflation expectations.

B. Australia3 
C. Canada3 
D. Euro area3

E. United Kingdom3 
F. Korea3 
G. Sweden3

Demand-driven inflation
Supply-driven inflation

1 The original Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022) inflation decomposition is expressed in quarter-on-quarter changes and concerns standardised
inflation series. For our estimations, we use the mean and standard deviation of the aggregate inflation series to back out the demand and 
supply components of inflation, and then express those two components as year-on-year changes. 2 Decomposition based on the method
in Shapiro (2022). Quarterly averages of monthly observations for the United States. 3 Decomposition based on the method in Eickmeier
and Hofmann (2022).

Sources: Eickmeier and Hofmann (2022); Shapiro (2022); OECD; authors’ calculations.

Following the literature (eg Hofmann and Bogdanova (2012); Carvalho et al (2021)), we estimate the 
structural Taylor rule specifications in (1) and (2) based on reduced form OLS regressions. These regressions 
write:

where the structural parameters of (1) are backed out from the auxiliary regression as follows: ρ= ρ௔௨௫, α= 
α௔௨௫ /(1-ρ௔௨௫), β= β௔௨௫ /(1-ρ௔௨௫).

where the structural parameters of (2) are backed out as follows: ρ=ρ௔௨௫, 𝛼௦ = 𝛼௦,௔௨௫/(1-ρ௔௨௫), 𝛼ௗ = 
𝛼ௗ,௔௨௫/(1-ρ௔௨௫), β = β௔௨௫ /(1-ρ௔௨௫).

The jurisdiction-specific samples are as follows: Australia: Q1 1999–Q1 2023; Canada: Q1 1999– Q2 2023; 
the euro area: Q1 2002 –Q4 2023; Korea: Q1 1999–Q3 2023; Sweden: Q1 1999–Q4 2023; the United 
Kingdom: Q1 2000–Q2 2023, the United States: Q3 1979 –Q2 2024 .

Large language models: a primer for economists1

Large language models (LLMs) are powerful tools for analysing textual data, with substantial 
untapped potential in economic and central banking applications. Vast archives of text, including 
policy statements, financial reports and news, offer rich opportunities for analysis. This special 
feature provides an accessible introduction to LLMs aimed at economists and offers applied 
researchers a practical walkthrough of their use. We provide a step-by-step guide on the use of 
LLMs covering data organisation, signal extraction, quantitative analysis and output evaluation. 
As an illustration, we apply the framework to analyse perceived drivers of stock market dynamics 
based on over 60,000 news articles between 2021 and 2023. While macroeconomic and monetary 
policy news are important, market sentiment also exerts substantial influence.

Large language models (LLMs) represent a breakthrough application of machine 
learning techniques to natural language processing (NLP). Machine learning 
algorithms excel at imposing mathematical structure on unstructured data. They do 
so by converting text, speech or images into arrays of numbers, ie vectors. This 
“embedding” process has a wide variety of applications, as it transforms complex 
unstructured data into structured data suitable for mathematical operations and 
statistical analysis. LLM techniques can support many use cases, such as forecasting, 
nowcasting and surveillance, as well as sentiment analysis of news, social media and 
policy reports. For economists and central bankers accustomed to working with 
structured numerical data, LLMs are powerful additions to their toolkit.

This primer offers accessible guidance on LLM technologies and highlights key 
considerations for economists. 2 We cover topics such as model selection, pre-
processing techniques, topic modelling, quantitative analysis and the involvement of 
human judgment. The guide is tailored to use cases commonly encountered by 
central bankers but with a wide applicability in any social science field that works with 
text data. To showcase the practical usage, we apply our guidelines to analyse 
perceived drivers of US equity prices, with accompanying sample code available in a 
GitHub repository. An online glossary provides definitions of key technical terms.

1 
The views expressed are not necessarily those of the Bank for International Settlements. For helpful 
comments, we are grateful to Douglas Araujo, Claudio Borio, Leonardo Gambacorta, Gaston Gelos, 
Benoît Mojon, Andreas Schrimpf, Hyun Song Shin and Kevin Tracol. All remaining errors are ours.

2 
Our focus on practical implementation complements recent reviews such as Araujo et al (2024), Athey 
and Imbens (2019), Dell (2024) and Korinek (2023, 2024).

• 
LLMs excel at organising text data into structured vector form. Unlocking their full potential requires 
careful planning, good research design and awareness of the tools’ limitations.

• 
We discuss some best practices in deploying LLMs, including: (i) a modular workflow, (ii) informed choices 
of LLM tools and (iii) sufficient training data and examples for more complex tasks.

• 
Common pitfalls are: (i) unrealistic expectations of LLMs' capabilities, (ii) sub-optimal management of 
computational resources and (iii) insufficient use of human judgment in evaluating output.

We first introduce key technologies that underpin LLMs. We then present a 
stylised workflow for their application, highlighting best practices and common 
pitfalls. Next, we show how to implement this workflow in a concrete exercise by 
isolating perceived drivers of US stock market movements. And finally we conclude.

Machine learning techniques excel at imposing mathematical structure on 
unstructured data. In the NLP context, this entails projecting words into a vector space 
– a process called embedding. Relationships between words are then represented by 
their Euclidean distance in the vector space, with a smaller distance indicating a closer 
semantic relationship. The word embedding for “football” is closer to “basketball” and 
further from “monsoon”, which is closer to “cloud”. These embeddings allow the use 
of algebraic techniques to convey relationships between words (see BIS (2024)). For 
example, the embeddings for countries and capitals would obey: 𝑆𝑒𝑜𝑢𝑙
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗= 𝐾𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑎
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗−
𝑆𝑝𝑎𝚤𝑛
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗+ 𝑀𝑎𝑑𝑟𝚤𝑑
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗, consistent with the notion that Seoul is related to Korea in the same 
way that Madrid is related to Spain. Similarly, simple linear algebra applies, eg 
𝑆𝑒𝑜𝑢𝑙
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗−𝐾𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑎
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗= 𝑀𝑎𝑑𝑟𝚤𝑑
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗−𝑆𝑝𝑎𝚤𝑛
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗.
 Furthermore, 
embeddings 
for 
sentences, 
paragraphs or any group of words can be computed as a weighted sum of the word 
embeddings to represent their collective meaning (Arora et al (2017)). Embeddings 
pave the way for applying mathematical tools to languages, enhancing tasks such as 
sentiment analysis, translation, sentence completion and named-entity recognition 
(eg recognising the Bank for International Settlements as a single unit rather than 
four separate words). This mapping of textual data into numerical form using 
embeddings is essential for any subsequent analysis.

Early neural networks3 for NLP (eg Word2vec (Mikolov et al (2013)) assigned a 
single unique vector to each word. These methods, which were significant 
advancements at the time, have been extensively utilised by economists since their 
inception.4 However, this one-to-one mapping suffers from an important drawback – 
it cannot recognise the meanings of words that vary with context. It might struggle 
with a sentence such as “The bank raises rates to lower inflation.” Inferring correctly

3 
A neural network is a function that maps inputs to outputs through layers of matrix multiplications 
and a component-wise non-linear function that can provide a tight fit across a variety of tasks.

4 
See Matsui and Ferrara (2022) and the references therein.

that “bank” refers to the “central bank” rather than a riverbank or a commercial bank 
requires taking into account the words that give context in this sentence, namely 
“raises” and “rates”.

What gives LLMs an edge over earlier NLP methods is a neural network known 
as the transformer architecture (Box A). This breakthrough creates a word embedding 
based on its context, allowing the embedding to capture the word’s meaning within 
the overall context of the surrounding text rather than just its dictionary form.5 For 
example, the transformer architecture would place embeddings for “bank” (financial) 
and “money” closer together because they frequently appear in similar contexts, while 
“bank” (river) would be positioned further away from “money” and closer to 
“meadow”. Additionally, LLMs account for word sequences in sentences, enabling 
them to clearly distinguish between “The bank raises rates to lower inflation” and “The 
bank lowers rates to raise inflation.”

The original transformer for translation included two components: an encoder, which 
transforms input language into an embedding vector, and a decoder, which converts 
the embedding into output language. Current LLMs draw on one of the two – the 
encoder as in bidirectional encoder representations from transformer (BERT) or the 
decoder as in generative pretrained transformer (GPT). Each has its own strengths. 
GPT sequentially uses each word’s preceding text to create its contextualised 
embedding and can be used to generate text. This self-generating process is similar 
to how an autoregressive model is capable of making recursive forecasts. In contrast, 
BERT uses both preceding and subsequent words taken together to create the 
embedding for each word. It is akin to using the full sample to draw econometric 
inferences. GPT is more widely recognised but is not necessarily superior for all tasks. 
In many economic applications, BERT may be more suitable for quantitative analysis 
because it uses subsequent text to infer context (eg Gambacorta et al (2024)).

Economists can deploy LLMs to analyse vast amounts of text data more 
accurately and efficiently. LLMs are not a blank slate, as their parameters have been 
previously estimated with massive data sets downloaded from the internet — a 
process commonly known as pretraining. Economists can directly use these 
pretrained models to embed text for analysis. Alternatively, they can re-estimate or 
modify the LLM parameters using their economic text data, much like with any 
econometric model. This process, known as fine-tuning, adjusts the LLM to the 
specific economic data and research questions, yielding more accurate and relevant 
predictions.

Instead of fine-tuning, economists can also use the chatbot version of an LLM 
(eg ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, etc) and ask the question directly through the chat 
interface or via an application programming interface (API). This approach does not 
modify model parameters but allows users to obtain improved responses by 
providing more context and guidance through prompting, known as in-context 
learning (Box B). Although this approach allows the convenient use of plain English 
or any other natural language, managing the consistency and quality of responses 
for robust research output can be challenging.

5 
Originally proposed for translation (Vaswani et al (2017)), the transformer removes bottlenecks in 
previous architectures by processing data in parallel, increasing speed by several orders of magnitude.

Transformers are the core technology that underpins all current LLMs. They are parametric non-linear models 
built to generate embeddings of words while recognising their context. At the heart of the transformer 
architecture are two innovations: multi-headed attention and positional encoding (BIS (2024), Chapter III (Box B)). 
This box describes how these two mechanisms work together in transforming one-to-one word embeddings 
into contextualised vector embeddings (Graph A1).

The attention mechanism enables each word in a text to be interpreted in relation to all other words, 
enhancing the ability to consider context and relationships throughout the text. The mechanism is “multi-
headed”, as it uses several parallel attention layers to capture different meanings of the same word (purple 
layers in Graph A1). For instance, in the sentence “I sat on the south bank of the river Main overlooking the 
European Central Bank”, each occurrence of the word “bank” will be mapped to a different vector embedding 
based on its surrounding words. The first will be closer to “water”, and the second to “inflation”. The attention 
mechanism quantifies the similarity between the word “bank” and all the words in the context, through score 
vectors or attention weights. Mathematically speaking, these are the dot products between the embedding 
vector of “bank” and key vectors representing each word in the text, including “bank” itself.

Positional encoding (orange blocks in Graph A1) enables transformers to process data concurrently rather 
than sequentially, easing a key constraint faced by earlier neural network models. By embedding each word with 
positional information, transformers preserve the sequence of words and enable parallelised training. This, in 
turn, allows training with more data and the building of bigger models, hence superior performance.

Transformer models are characterised by four key features: the size of the training data, the size of the 
embedding vector, the context window (ie the length of text processed together in a batch) and the number of 
parameters. The quality of the embeddings usually improves with all four factors, with the size of the training 
data being the most important. The parameters are estimated using a vast amount of text data from sources 
such as the internet’s Common Crawl, which includes books, web content, social media posts, news articles and 
more (totalling 570 GB, cleaned from 45 TB of original text) (Brown et al (2020)). This extensive training enables 
the transformer to map any sentence given its context into vectors. However, only a few organisations possess 
the computational resources and data to train these very large models from scratch. Consequently, most users 
apply open source LLMs or access proprietary models through APIs, referring to them as pretrained or 
foundational models.

Chatbots based on LLMs can be used via APIs to directly ask questions – a method known as in-context learning, 
as it does not alter the LLM’s parameters. For example, one can ask the chatbot to assess the sentiment of a 
sentence. This approach bypasses the usual empirical procedure in economics, which typically involves building 
statistical models, gathering data and manipulating them for diagnosis, causal inference or prediction. While 
the traditional empirical procedure often provides better predictions with sufficient data, LLM chatbots (eg 
ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, etc) can yield surprisingly satisfactory results. This depends crucially, however, on how 
the question is framed – a process known as prompting. There are three main ways to prompt a chatbot.

The simplest way is to ask the question directly, eg: Can you tell me if the following central banker statement 
is hawkish, neutral or dovish? “Recent data point to stabilisation, though latent risks tied to supply disruptions may 
warrant cautious optimism.” Just indicate the sentiment to me without explanation. This approach, known as zero-
shot prompting, relies on the LLM’s existing training. However, the results may not align well with research goals, 
especially when the task at hand is subjective and domain specific.

To improve accuracy, one can add examples to the prompt, eg: I would classify [Sentence1] as hawkish, 
[Sentence2] as dovish, [Sentence3] as neutral,…. This few-shot prompting method (Brown et al (2020)) enhances 
performance by guiding the model through examples. More examples improve LLM performance.

The third method explains the researcher’s decision-making process to the chatbot itself, eg: I would 
classify: [Sentence1] as hawkish because [Reason1], [Sentence2] as dovish because [Reason2], and [Sentence3] as 
neutral because [Reason3]. This chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting has been known to outperform few-shot 
prompting in certain tasks, by guiding LLMs through a step-by-step reasoning process to help them produce 
more accurate responses (Wei et al (2022)).

Chatbot-based LLMs have several limitations in research applications. Once the context is reset, the chatbot 
forgets previous questions and examples. It is also important to emphasise that LLM-based chatbots predict 
statistically plausible outcomes but cannot ensure factual accuracy. Human oversight is therefore critical to 
interpret and validate results. And because changes in the prompt can alter outcomes, researchers should test 
multiple prompts using validation data wherever possible.

To show how to put LLMs to work, we lay out a step-by-step workflow analogous to 
that of an econometrician and discuss how LLM tools can enhance capabilities in 
analysing unstructured text data at scale.6 The workflow includes the following steps:

1. Data organisation: Just as an economist begins an empirical project by 
collecting and cleaning data, an analysis of text starts with text retrieval, pre-
processing and, additionally, vector embedding.

2. Signal extraction: The next step is to extract key informational content from 
the data, similar to principal component analysis (PCA) or trend filtering in 
econometrics. This is important because the embedding vectors from the 
previous step have many dimensions (eg 4,096 for Llama 3.1 8B) and are too 
complex to analyse. Hence, some dimensionality and complexity reduction 
are necessary. Topic modelling is a powerful tool to do this, by organising 
text into common themes while respecting the context.

3. Quantitative analysis: In this step, the researcher engages in quantitative 
modelling and analysis. Sentiment analysis is one common tool for 
measuring intent, tone and opinions from text and can be assisted by LLMs 
to identify meaningful labels or scores. Standard statistical methods such as 
regression may also be applied directly to embeddings or sentiment scores 
produced by LLMs.

4. Outcome evaluation: The last step is to evaluate the model’s output, eg 
based on the out-of-sample prediction as in standard econometrics. Here, 
text data raise unique challenges.

We consider each of the above steps in more detail.

The objective of this step is to gather relevant text data and prepare them for 
contextualised embedding through text cleaning. The pertinent sources may be 
central bank statements, governors’ speeches, policy papers, news articles or any 
other text sources. The next step is to divide the documents into so-called “chunks” 
of words, ie text segments of words, to prepare for embeddings (step 2 of 
Graph 1).7 Each chunk serves as a unit of text analysis. The chunk size strikes a balance 
between breadth and granularity. It should be long enough to capture the relevant 
information and context, but not so long as to collapse a large block of text into a 
single vector and lose the nuances of different messages.

The next step involves breaking words down to their root forms to simplify the 
task of LLM embeddings. Tokenisation is a process of breaking words down into 
smaller units called tokens; lemmatisation in turn simplifies words to their base forms 
to focus on their core meanings (step 3 of Graph 1). For example, tokenisation breaks 
the word “disinflationary” down into three tokens: “dis-” (prefix), “inflation” (base 
word) and “-ary” (suffix). Lemmatisation assigns “lowered” to “lower”, “pressures” to 
“pressure” and “tracks” to “track”. Each LLM has its own set of rules for tokenising and 
lemmatising words.8 Researchers need to apply appropriate tokenisation rules that 
are compatible with their selected LLM.

Once all text chunks have been tokenised and lemmatised, one can proceed to 
generating the embeddings (step 4 of Graph 1). If using a BERT-like (encoder) model, 
one will generate a global embedding for the entire chunk, called the classification 
(CLS) embedding. If using a GPT-based (decoder) model, the embedding for the text 
chunk can be obtained as a weighted sum of each word’s embedding (Arora et al 
(2017)). In either case, one can rely on embedding models that have been trained by 
tech companies such as Anthropic, Google, Meta, Mistral AI or OpenAI. Alternatively, 
one could modify these models using own data9 to tailor the embeddings to research 
objectives. This domain-adaptation option is naturally more costly and is only 
advisable if sufficient data and computational resources are available. Additionally,

9 
Training these models with private data is not advisable if the models are available for widespread 
use, as they may memorise the training data.

the recent state-of-the-art LLMs are often sufficiently trained with economic terms, 
lessening the need for additional training.

The second step aims to extract signals and distil key information from the retrieved 
text data through dimensionality reduction. It simplifies high-dimensional 
embedding vectors by extracting only the most relevant information needed for 
meaningful interpretation, thus improving computational efficiency. In LLM analysis, 
potential tools include topic modelling, clustering techniques or embedding-based

dimensionality reduction, such as Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection 
(UMAP) (McInnes et al (2018)). These methods facilitate the formation of clusters of 
embeddings obtained from the previous step (step 5 of Graph 1).

We focus on topic modelling due to its broad applicability, where the objective 
is typically to extract the main messages from text data. Traditional topic modelling 
tools, such as latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei et al (2003)), do this by grouping 
keywords under common themes but cannot differentiate between nuanced 
subtopics or contextual shifts within the same overarching theme. With LLMs, topic 
modelling leverages the transformer architecture and embeddings to provide a 
context-sensitive representation of text in identifying the dominant themes.

Unsupervised topic modelling summarises the dominant themes in text through 
keyword lists, offering a high-level overview of key topics without relying on pre-
defined classification schemes. A common procedure, such as BERTopic 
(Grootendorst (2022)), starts by generating embeddings for each text chunk. The 
algorithm then groups contextually similar embeddings into clusters, typically after 
applying dimensionality reduction to enhance efficiency and performance (see step 5 
of Graph 1). After completing this step, a researcher may assign a topic label – a few 
keywords – that best represents the cluster. These labels are often selected manually 
from the original list of keywords associated with the cluster, both reflecting the 
researcher’s focus and interests and ensuring clear differentiation between clusters. 
For example, in step 6 of Graph 1, one might label Topic 1 as “monetary policy” and 
Topic 2 as “FX markets”.

A potential drawback of unsupervised topic modelling is that it may generate 
topics irrelevant to the researcher’s focus. For example, when analysing stock markets, 
names of major stocks or asset management firms might dominate because they are 
frequent within a specific cluster and distinct from those in other clusters. This may 
not be of interest to a macro-finance researcher who wants to study monetary policy 
and market valuations. As a result, unsupervised methods often require post-
processing to align the topics with specific research goals – a practice we follow in 
the application below.

Resorting to supervised topic modelling avoids generating irrelevant topics, as it 
allows researchers to define topics of interest from the outset. One common option 
is seeding, where a set of relevant terms is introduced to guide the topic modelling 
process. For example, providing keywords related to monetary policy (eg “Federal 
Reserve”, “policy rates”, “FOMC Chair”) directs the model to focus on text segments 
that are semantically closest to the concept of monetary policy.

Once the text data have been converted into vectors and organised by topics, they 
are ready for use in quantitative analysis. As the embeddings are in vector format, 
researchers can employ standard econometric tools such as panel regressions for 
classification data or autoregressions for time-stamped text. In the illustration that 
follows, we focus on sentiment analysis. This is one of the most relevant problems 
in economics and social science when the data are only in text form.

Sentiment analysis assigns predefined labels to each text chunk. Classification 
could be binary (positive or negative), tertiary (positive, neutral or negative) or more

multidimensional. 10 Without an LLM, this transformation may need to rely on a 
dictionary of terms compiled by the researcher to map a chosen list of words 
reflecting tones to sentiments. This approach is laborious and prone to errors and 
risks false assignments when context is important.

Depending on the application, one can analyse sentiment either at the small 
chunk level (local analysis) or globally across the entire document. The chunk size sets 
the level of granularity: smaller chunks allow for different passages in an article to 
convey different sentiments. In some cases, capturing local sentiment may be more 
advisable, as the goal may be to uncover different aspects of the unfolding of a story. 
For instance, both positive and negative forces weighing on the stock market could 
be described in the same document. In other cases, the document’s overall message 
may be where the researcher’s interest lies. For instance, in monetary policy 
statements, the overall assessment and final decision may matter the most, justifying 
document-level sentiment analysis.

The choice of language models for sentiment analysis depends on many factors. 
These include task complexity, text volume, the availability of labelled training data, 
computing capacity, expertise and the time required for manual labelling. Among 
sentiment analysis tools, pretrained encoder-based models such as BERT (Devlin et al 
(2018)) and RoBERTa (Liu et al (2019)) offer a suitable architecture for most 
applications. These models are specifically designed to encode contextual 
information, excel at capturing the sentiments of input text and are fast to run. For 
highly specialised applications, specifically trained LLMs can be more effective. For 
instance, the “CB-LMs” of Gambacorta et al (2024) are trained on central banking 
documents and may be better at capturing central banking nuances than general 
models. As for decoder-based GPT models, their extremely large sizes are key 
advantages, though their architecture may not be ideal for sentiment classification 
and they tend to have a longer runtime.

If the researcher opts for BERT-based LLMs, they will need to conduct fine-tuning 
to help the model learn how to classify embeddings. This requires a labelled data set 
(eg assigning positive, neutral and negative to a portion of the data as training 
examples). During fine-tuning, the model is further trained on this labelled data set 
in a supervised learning process to classify sentiments in the embedding space 
(Devlin et al (2018)). The process updates both the embeddings themselves and the 
boundaries separating different sentiments, making it easier for the model to 
correctly classify sentiments of new text inputs.

If the researcher adopts GPT-based models which have been trained with a large 
amount of data, such as state-of-the-art chatbots, fine-tuning is often unnecessary 
and not worthwhile.11 In many cases, low-effort in-context learning can be sufficient 
(see Box B and Gambacorta et al (2024)). These models typically require minimal or 
no data preprocessing, such as tokenisation or embedding. Researchers can directly 
input text for topic modelling and sentiment analysis using common language 
instructions.

10 
One example is to capture the intensity and nuances of opinions expressed in economic or financial 
discourse. For instance, in analysing central bank communication, one can detect degrees of 
confidence and uncertainty about the economic outlook beyond binary classification.

11 
Fine-tuning GPT-based models is computationally demanding and generally does not improve 
performance over fine-tuning smaller BERT-based models for simple classification tasks.

LLMs, as a machine learning tool, are best evaluated by their predictive performance. 
For example, in classification problems, the objective could be to minimise the 
misclassification error. Note that usual statistical principles such as parsimony or 
statistical significance of coefficients do not apply in a machine learning context. 
Modern LLMs do in fact have hundreds of billions of parameters and embedding 
vectors with a few thousand elements. The main focus is on making accurate 
predictions in the test set, with overfitting concerns addressed by various techniques 
(eg regularisation, initialisation and stochastic gradient descent).

In evaluating performance, researchers should choose error measures that align 
with their applications and desired outcomes. For example, in regression with outlier 
problems, absolute errors might be preferable to squared errors. Or when the 
outcome spans several orders of magnitude, measuring errors in the logarithm of the 
output may help reduce the relative error. For problems with imbalanced classes and 
uneven costs for false positives and false negatives, the F1 score 12 is often an 
appropriate metric, as it trades off “precision” and “recall” in classification. Precision 
measures how many predicted positive examples are positive, while recall captures 
how many positive examples are correctly identified by the model. Combining the 
two helps control both false positives and false negatives.

13 
The chunk size should reflect research objectives, eg in our case, to differentiate topics roughly 
corresponding to paragraphs. While a 100-word chunk is standard, this can vary with applications.

To assign intuitive and descriptive labels to the topics, we use Llama 3.1 to 
generate initial labels based on the grouped keyword sets. One could also apply

17 
It is possible to minimise the number of topics directly from BERTopic. However, starting with more 
detailed topics from BERTopic, and then using LDA to consolidate them later in a modular way, offers 
better control over the process and provides greater transparency and clarity for the analysis.

Llama 3.1 from the initial step of topic modelling. That said, as discussed, the large 
input size and computational overhead pose a constraint. Additionally, maintaining 
control over the process ensures more effective and transparent topic labelling.

Finally, we review the topics and make final manual adjustments to ensure the 
labels and groupings are contextually meaningful and aligned with research 
objectives. The initial topic grouping performed by LDA, along with the labelling 
provided by Llama 3.1, facilitates this process. After reviewing, we categorise the news 
articles into three broad topics: fundamentals (with KeyBERT keywords such as “profit”, 
“economy” and “employment”), monetary policy (“fed” and ”interest rate”), and 
market sentiment (“overbought”, “buzz”, “volatility” and “ipos”).

This classification into three topics mirrors common analytical approaches to 
stock price analysis. First, stock prices are determined by current and expected future 
dividends (fundamentals). These are adjusted by the discount rate, which depends on 
the risk-free interest rate (monetary policy) as well as a compensation for risk that 
reflects investor risk appetite and sentiment (market sentiment).

18 
Although BERT-based models are often suitable for sentiment classification tasks, two key factors 
motivated our choice of a GPT-based model. First, the length of each chunk (100 words) makes the 
classification task more complex, requiring a high-performance model. Second, topic modelling has 
reduced the number of articles to a size that is feasible for processing by a large model.

The aggregate sentiment score aligns well with stock market movements (Graph 3.A). 
This suggests that the procedure is extracting the appropriate signals from text data. 
Examining the relative importance of sentiment scores across the three categories, 
“market sentiment” and “fundamentals” co-move the most with the stock returns, 
showing correlation coefficients of 0.64 and 0.52, respectively (Graph 3.B).

The association between monetary policy sentiment and stock market 
performance is more tenuous, with a correlation of 0.30. Despite this period being 
one of the most aggressive monetary tightening episodes in recent history, the stock 
market – aside from the large drawdown in 2022 – held up well. One possible 
interpretation is that strong “fundamentals”, and hence associated positive “market 
sentiment”, may have offset the dampening effect of “monetary policy” tightening on 
stock returns.

fundamental factors. The correlation between monetary policy sentiment and stock 
returns rose to its highest point of over 0.6 in 2022, coinciding with the most active 
monetary policy tightening. But once the tightening stopped, the correlation between 
monetary policy sentiment and stock returns declined (Graph 3.C). The result is 
consistent with the broader disconnect between financial conditions and the 
monetary policy stance in recent years, as documented elsewhere. 20

Our stylised workflow offers broad lessons on general principles and best practices in 
making the most of LLMs. One is careful resource planning. While extremely powerful, 
the use of LLMs can be computationally expensive. Some of the computational steps, 
such as working with high-dimensional embeddings or the largest LLMs, may be run 
at most a few times in practice. This also means good research design is critical. For 
example, condensing input text data, as we do using topic modelling, helps reduce 
unnecessary computational load and improve model performance by focusing 
resources on the most relevant tasks. More generally, adopting a modular step-by-
step process would enable researchers to check and analyse intermediate outputs, 
ensuring that the LLM procedure produces sensible outcomes as intended. Finally, 
given the probabilistic nature of LLM algorithms, some repetition of the procedures 
would help ensure robustness, if at additional computational costs.

Another important consideration pertains to data privacy and confidentiality. 
Researchers must ensure compliance with relevant regulations, such as corporate 
policies, data licences or other data protection laws. Using locally hosted LLMs, 
instead of cloud-based ones, may mitigate risks to some extent but not entirely, as 
some regulations apply regardless of the hosting environment.

The vast power of LLMs is best harnessed when researchers both understand and 
manage the models’ limitations effectively. Recognising and addressing potential 
biases is essential at each stage of the analysis to ensure a successful application. As 
LLMs are in essence statistical models, it is up to users to apply informed judgment 
in evaluating outputs. The synergy between human oversight and LLM capabilities 
can help enhance quality control while mitigating potential risks, leading to more 
robust outcomes.

This special feature explores how the responsiveness of new housing supply to house prices (the 
supply elasticity) affects the transmission of monetary policy. We document a long-term decline 
in the supply elasticity of new housing and find that a less elastic supply amplifies the impact of 
monetary policy on house prices compared with rents. This disparity could raise questions about 
the measurement of housing costs in inflation measures targeted by central banks, as typically 
rents, rather than house prices, directly enter consumer price indices. Our findings highlight the 
importance of considering changing housing supply conditions in monetary policy formulation.

There have been strong secular trends in housing supply over the past few decades. 
In advanced economies (AEs), housing starts have been on a steady downward trend 
since the 1970s (Graph 1.A), accompanied by a rise in house prices relative to rents 
(Graph 1.B). This contrasts with the general trend in emerging market economies 
(EMEs) where housing starts have steadily ramped up since the 1990s, while the ratio 
of house prices to rents has remained more stable. These differences in housing 
supply conditions appear to play a crucial role in shaping the relationship between 
house prices and rents.

• 
When housing supply is inelastic, a given interest rate change leads to greater adjustments in the price-
to-rent ratio, almost entirely accounted for by the larger impact on house prices. Rents barely respond 
irrespective of the supply elasticity.

• 
Larger house price responses due to a declining supply elasticity could strengthen the monetary 
transmission via its effect on homeowners’ balance sheets. The limited traction on rents indicates that a 
considerable portion of the consumer price index is unresponsive to monetary policy.