amplify stress in the financial system.1

1. Valuation pressures arise when asset prices are high relative to economic fundamentals or

historical norms. These developments are often driven by an increased willingness of investors

to take on risk. As such, elevated valuation pressures may increase the possibility of outsized

2. Excessive borrowing by businesses and households exposes the borrowers to distress if

their incomes decline or the assets they own fall in value. In these cases, businesses and

households with high debt burdens may need to cut back spending, affecting economic activity

3. Excessive leverage within the financial sector increases the risk that financial institutions will

not have the ability to absorb losses without disruptions to their normal business operations

when hit by adverse shocks. In those situations, institutions will be forced to cut back lending,

sell their assets, or even shut down. Such responses can impair credit access for households

4. Funding risks expose the financial system to the possibility that investors will rapidly

withdraw their funds from a particular institution or sector, creating strains across markets

or institutions. Many financial institutions raise funds from the public with a commitment

to return their investors’ money on short notice, but those institutions then invest much of

those funds in assets that are hard to sell quickly or have a long maturity. This liquidity and

maturity transformation can create an incentive for investors to withdraw funds quickly in

adverse situations. Facing such withdrawals, financial institutions may need to sell assets

quickly at “fire sale” prices, thereby incurring losses and potentially becoming insolvent, as

well as causing additional price declines that can create stress across markets and at other

The Federal Reserve’s monitoring framework also tracks domestic and international develop-

ments to identify near-term risks—that is, plausible adverse developments or shocks that could

stress the U.S. financial system. The analysis of these risks focuses on assessing how such

potential shocks may spread through the U.S. financial system, given our current assessment of

While this framework provides a systematic way to assess financial stability, some potential

risks may be novel or difficult to quantify and therefore are not captured by the current approach.

Given these complications, we rely on ongoing research by the Federal Reserve staff, academ-

ics, and other experts to improve our measurement of existing vulnerabilities and to keep pace

with changes in the financial system that could create new forms of vulnerabilities or add to

Federal Reserve actions to promote the resilience of the 
financial system

The assessment of financial vulnerabilities informs Federal Reserve actions to promote the resil-

ience of the financial system. The Federal Reserve works with other domestic agencies directly

and through the Financial Stability Oversight Council to monitor risks to financial stability and to

undertake supervisory and regulatory efforts to mitigate the risks and consequences of financial

Actions taken by the Federal Reserve to promote the resilience of the financial system include

its supervision and regulation of financial institutions. In the aftermath of the 2007–09 financial

crisis, these actions have included requirements for more and higher-quality capital, an innovative

stress-testing regime, and new liquidity regulations applied to the largest banks in the U.S. In

addition, the Federal Reserve’s assessment of financial vulnerabilities informs decisions regard-

ing the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The CCyB is designed to increase the resilience of

large banking organizations when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses and to promote

a more sustainable supply of credit over the economic cycle.

This report reviews vulnerabilities affecting the stability of the U.S. financial system related to

valuation pressures, borrowing by businesses and households, financial-sector leverage, and

funding risks. It also highlights several near-term risks that, if realized, could interact with these

• Demand for a broad 
range of higher-risk 
assets bounced back 
after the market declines 
in April 2025; prices for 
these assets remained 
elevated relative to their 
historical relationships 
with cash ﬂows.

• Hedge fund leverage 
remained high, having 
increased across 
a range of trading 
strategies. This 
increased leverage has 
supported signiﬁcant 
positions in key 
markets.

• Assets in cash-
management vehicles 
continued to grow, 
primarily driven by 
government money 
market funds, which 
historically have 
been the least fragile 
category.

• Gross leverage of 
publicly traded ﬁrms 
remained high and 
credit to privately 
held ﬁrms continued 
to grow. The ability of 
most publicly traded 
ﬁrms to service their 
debt was robust, 
although capacity 
for some small 
businesses and risky 
privately held ﬁrms 
continued to decline.

• Liquidity in Treasury 
and equity markets 
recovered from the 
April declines.

• As a share of general 
account assets, 
life insurers’ use of 
nontraditional liabilities 
remained small.

• Leverage at life 
insurers was in the top 
quartile of its historical 
distribution.

• Transaction-based 
prices for commercial 
properties showed 
signs of stabilization. 
Vacancy rates and rent 
growth in the ofﬁce 
sector also appeared to 
be stabilizing.

• The banking system 
remained sound 
and resilient, with 
historically high 
regulatory capital 
ratios, though fair value 
losses on ﬁxed-rate 
assets were still sizable 
for some banks.

• Most domestic banks 
maintained high 
levels of liquid assets 
and stable funding, 
and their reliance on 
uninsured deposits 
remained well below 
recent peaks.

• Household debt 
was mostly owed 
by borrowers 
with strong credit 
scores. Mortgage 
delinquency rates 
remained subdued 
due to large home 
equity cushions and 
strong underwriting 
standards.

• Dealer leverage 
remained low, while 
their intermediation 
activity increased to 
high levels.

• Auto and credit card 
loan delinquencies 
were little changed 
and remained 
somewhat above their 
average levels over 
the past decade.

A summary of the developments in the four broad categories of vulnerabilities since the

April 2025 Financial Stability Report is as follows:

1. Asset valuations. Asset valuations were elevated. Since the market volatility of early April

subsided, the ratio of equity prices to earnings has returned to near the high end of its

historical range. An estimate of the equity premium—the compensation for risk in equity

markets—remained well below average. Spreads between yields on corporate bonds and

those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities also settled to pre-April levels, which were

low compared to their longer-term history. Liquidity in Treasury markets recovered from April’s

trough. In U.S. property markets, home price increases slowed, but the ratio of house prices

to rents continued to be near the highest levels on record. Transaction-based price indexes

(adjusted for inflation) for commercial real estate (CRE) properties showed some signs of

stabilization following significant declines, though vulnerabilities due to upcoming refinancing

needs remained (see Section 1, Asset Valuations).

2. Borrowing by businesses and households. Vulnerabilities from business and household

debt remained moderate. Total debt of businesses and households as a fraction of gross

domestic product (GDP) continued to trend slightly down to its lowest level in the past two

decades. Measures of the leverage of publicly traded firms remained somewhat above the

medians of their historical distributions, and debt owed by privately held firms continued to

grow. While publicly traded firms’ ability to service their debt remained solid in aggregate, the

debt-servicing capacity of small businesses and risky privately held firms declined in recent

years. Household debt relative to GDP has been subdued in recent history. Most household

debt was owed by borrowers with strong credit histories. Mortgage delinquency rates remained

low due to large home equity cushions and strong underwriting standards. Delinquencies on

3. Leverage in the financial sector. Vulnerabilities associated with financial leverage remained

banking sector remained sound and resilient overall, and most banks continued to report

4. Funding risks. Funding risks have remained moderate. Assets in cash-management vehicles

This report also discusses potential near-term risks, based in part on topics cited in market

outreach (reported in the box “Survey of Salient Risks to Financial Stability”). Box 5.1 shows

Asset valuations were elevated, with some markets setting new 
highs after recovering from April’s declines

receded. Prices remained high relative to their historical relationship with fundamentals across a

sode, yields on Treasury securities exhibited considerable volatility, which, in turn, contributed to

April’s deterioration in market liquidity.

Prices and fundamentals in CRE markets showed continued signs of stabilizing, although the

potential for distressed commercial property sales remains if CRE borrowers who need to refi-

nance their mortgages are unable to do so. In residential real estate markets, prices continued

to rise well above their historical relationship with fundamentals but at a lower rate. In the year

Treasury yields declined amid normalizing volatility

Treasury yields across 2- and 10-year maturities declined since the April report and continued

to be well above their average levels over the past 15 years (figure 1.1). Over the same period,

albeit near the top of its range since 2010 (figure 1.2). Moves in Treasury yields were sizable

in early April. Since the April episode, interest rate volatility implied by interest rate swaps

decreased to just below its long-term median (figure 1.3).

Equity valuations continued to increase, while volatility declined

Measures of equity valuations rebounded after April’s market episode. The forward price-to-

well above its historical median (figure 1.4). The difference between the forward earnings-to-price

require for holding stocks relative to risk-free bonds (the equity premium)—remained well below

realized—rose dramatically in April but have since declined to below their historical medians

Corporate bond markets have been resilient; spreads in corporate 
debt markets narrowed and remained tight

Yields on triple-B-rated and high-yield corporate bonds were lower than the levels observed in the

Market liquidity refers to the ease of buying and selling an asset. Low liquidity can amplify the vol-

atility of asset prices and result in larger price moves in response to shocks. Similarly, increased

volatility can reduce market liquidity because liquidity providers may become more cautious in

providing quotes. In extreme cases, low liquidity can threaten continued market functioning, lead-

ing to a situation in which participants are unable to trade without incurring a significant cost.

Treasury market liquidity is particularly important because of the key role these securities play in

but improved on net compared to April as volatility subsided (figure 1.13). Through September,

recent years. The box “Artificial Intelligence and Algorithmic Trading” explores how the adoption of

AI in algorithmic trading could bring new opportunities and challenges to financial markets.

Vacancy rates and rent growth—fundamental

determinants of prices—also appeared to be

stabilizing for office properties. Capitaliza-

tion rates at the time of property purchase,

mercial properties relative to their prices,

were unchanged in aggregate since the April

Source: MSCI—Real Capital Analytics; consumer 
price index, Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver 
Analytics.

report but remained below the average of the

historical distribution (figure 1.15). After a

period of tightening from 2022 to 2024, most

banks have left standards on CRE loans unchanged over the past two quarters (figure 1.16).3 In

the July survey, banks reported, on net, that the level of credit standards for several types of CRE

loans was still somewhat or significantly tighter than longer-run norms.

A large volume of CRE debt is scheduled to mature over the coming year, and forced sales, were

they to occur, would put downward pressure on CRE prices. However, continued willingness by

lenders to mitigate losses via loan modification would alleviate some of that downside risk.

3 The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) results reported are based on banks’ 
responses weighted by each bank’s outstanding loans in the respective loan category and might therefore differ from 
the results reported in the published SLOOS, which are based on banks’ unweighted responses; SLOOS results are 
available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sloos.htm.

Figure 1.15. Income of commercial properties relative to prices leveled off but remained below the 
historical average

2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0

Source: MSCI—Real Capital Analytics; Andrew C. Florance, Norm G. Miller, Ruijue Peng, and Jay Spivey (2010), 
“Slicing, Dicing, and Scoping the Size of the U.S. Commercial Real Estate Market,” Journal of Real Estate Portfolio 
Management, vol. 16 (May–August), pp. 101–18.

Figure 1.16. Banks reported that lending standards for commercial real estate loans were little 
changed in the first half of 2025

1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
−100

Source: Federal Reserve Board, Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices; Federal Reserve 
Board staff calculations.

Residential real estate prices remained high relative to their 
historical relationship with fundamentals

After posting double-digit gains in 2021 and 2022, house price increases have slowed

(figure 1.17). Model-based measures of housing valuations, which assess their historical relation-

ships with fundamentals, remained high (figure 1.18). Price-to-rent ratios fell in the geographic

areas where they had been the highest, suggesting some cooling in those markets (figure 1.19).

Credit standards for borrowers remained tight relative to the early 2000s, suggesting that weak

credit standards are not driving house price growth.

Figure 1.17. House prices continued to increase in recent months but at a lower rate

2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
−25
−20
−15
−10

Farmland valuations remained high relative to farm income

U.S. farmland values remained elevated based on annual data as of August 2025, continuing to

rise from historically high levels (figure 1.20), as did price-to-rent ratios (figure 1.21). Prices con-

tinued to be sustained by limited farmland inventory, despite elevated interest rates and higher

The majority of AI applications in trading today seem to be building upon established practices in 
machine learning and sophisticated data analysis techniques, rather than representing a signifi cant 
departure from existing methods.2 Therefore, AI is reportedly viewed as providing effi ciency gains, 
without a fundamental change in the trading process itself, at least for now. Nonetheless, some 
policymakers and academics have noted that AI-driven algorithmic trading may generate fi nancial sta-
bility risks such as correlated trading, collusion, market manipulation, and market concentration. As 
we discuss in this box, while the adoption of AI could potentially increase these risks, other factors 
often mitigate the potential impact of its use by market participants.

A long-standing concern is that widespread use of trading algorithms with common reaction to market 
events has the potential to exacerbate market volatility and lead to rapid price swings, ﬂ ash crashes, 
and market dislocations. That said, the use of AI may also help reduce the likelihood of correlated 
trade execution, as it facilitates the use of richer information and more complex logic, potentially 
leading to a less uniform response to news and to a greater diversity of trading signals among market 
participants.3 This could, in turn, improve price discovery and market effi ciency, leading to more accu-
rate and timely reﬂ ection of information in market prices.

The self-learning nature of generative AI-driven trading algorithms also raises concerns about the 
potential for these algorithms to engage in sophisticated market manipulation.4 Manipulative uses 
of AI may be inherently harder to detect than currently known methods such as spoofi ng and quote 
stuffi ng—submitting a large number of orders to create a false impression of supply or demand—due 
to greater design complexity and increased ability to obfuscate manipulative intent.  At the same 
time, however, AI has the potential to signifi cantly enhance market surveillance techniques for inves-
tigators and supervisors. Major electronic market operators are already utilizing advanced machine 
learning techniques to detect market manipulation and collusive behaviors.5 Generative AI could

further improve this process by identifying suspicious behavior and providing rapid textual descrip-
tions and interpretations of the detected issues. Improved market surveillance capabilities could then 
strengthen market integrity and enhance market liquidity.

Academic literature has also identifi ed the potential for self-learning AI-powered trading algorithms 
to autonomously develop collusive behavior, potentially impairing competition and market effi ciency, 
leading to reduced market liquidity and less informative pricing.6 However, others observe that the 
likelihood of collusion is small if traders’ learning processes differ. Furthermore, algorithmic traders 
have strong incentives to differentiate their strategies, as non-collusion can be highly profi table when 
others collude, suggesting that algorithmic heterogeneity is a more likely equilibrium outcome.7

Finally, some observers have expressed concerns about barriers to entry and increasing concentra-
tion associated with the adoption of AI. The costs of developing and running generative AI models can 
be large, discouraging companies from developing proprietary models, potentially leading them to rely 
on third-party solutions and thus increasing dependence on common AI models. Common AI models 
could also lead to more similar processes through which traders learn, which, as noted previously, 
could increase the likelihood of collusion. At the same time, however, market participants observe 
that access to technology is being democratized with the development of AI, and wider access to 
sophisticated AI-driven trading technology could lower barriers to entry for smaller fi rms and individual 
investors. Increased access and competition could then also contribute to a more diverse range of 
market participants and strategies, fostering greater market heterogeneity and, hence, more resilient 
market functioning.

In summary, as with many new technologies, AI seems to bring both new dangers and new opportu-
nities for improvements to fi nancial markets. While the potential for AI to increase correlated trading 
and impact market competition cannot be dismissed, historical evidence from algorithmic trading 
suggests that correlated trading has not necessarily been detrimental to market quality. Moreover, 
strong incentives for algorithmic traders to have differentiated strategies may mitigate the risk of 
autonomous collusion, reduce correlated trading, and improve competition. Many exchanges have 
also implemented safeguards, such as circuit breakers, which, if deployed simultaneously across 
related markets, can help prevent excessive price ﬂ uctuations. The ability of AI to assist enforcement 
of securities laws could also strengthen market integrity. That said, continued monitoring of develop-
ments and further empirical research are warranted to ensure a comprehensive understanding of the 
fast-evolving landscape of AI in fi nancial markets.

Vulnerabilities from business and household debt remained moderate

The balance sheet conditions of businesses and households remained stable in aggregate since

the previous report. The level of total private nonfinancial-sector debt continued its moderate

Trends in both the business and household sectors contributed to the decline in that overall ratio

Business debt increased slightly; the debt-servicing capacity of 
publicly traded firms was generally solid

repayments—was negative in the second and third quarters of 2025, driven by increased

high relative to history, so did the debt-servicing capacity of publicly traded firms. For publicly

traded firms, where credit quality has been generally sound, interest coverage ratios (ICRs) were

ing leveraged loan borrowers, are sensitive to interest rate changes due to their high leverage,

high use of floating-rate loans, and short-term debt maturity structure. The volume-weighted

trend over the previous few years, as higher interest rates have contributed to reduced earnings

and increased the cost of debt servicing. The average ICR at issuance for private credit borrowers

similar to the previous report and remained near its historical median. The recent bankruptcies

of two privately held firms, an auto parts supplier and a subprime auto lender, so far appear to

be isolated events. However, these examples highlight that unexpected losses could arise from

opaque off-balance-sheet funding arrangements that may be used by certain privately held firms.

Credit availability to small businesses tightened, and delinquencies 
remained above pre-pandemic levels

According to the August 2025 National Federation of Independent Business’s Small Business

Economic Trends Survey, the share of firms that borrow regularly has trended down since

November 2021.4 Measures of small business loan originations were level through the first half

of 2025. Data from the Small Business Lending Survey showed that banks continued to tighten

4 This survey’s data are available on the National Federation of Independent Business’s website at https://www.nfib.
com/surveys/small-business-economic-trends.

credit standards.5 Interest rates on small business loans have been largely stable in recent

months and remained near the top of the range observed since 2008. Short-term (up to 90 days)

delinquency rates ticked up but were still substantially lower than during the pandemic or the

Great Recession. Long-term (more than 90 days) delinquency rates have levelled off recently but

remained above their pre-pandemic levels.

Outstanding household debt adjusted for inflation was little changed

Figure 2.10. Inflation-adjusted household debt 
was largely unchanged

inflation has been little changed over the

past two years. The share of that debt that is

currently owed by households with a subprime

credit rating has risen somewhat, reflecting

in part the rise in consumer delinquencies

and a related deterioration of those borrow-

ers’ credit scores (figure 2.10). The ratio of

total required household debt payments to

total disposable income (the household debt

service ratio) was little changed since the

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer 
Credit Panel/Equifax; consumer price index, Bureau 
of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics.

last report. Most household debt has fixed

interest rates, and the higher interest rate

Delinquency rates remained subdued due to large home equity cushions (figure 2.13) and strong

Consumer delinquencies remained high by historical standards

(figure 2.16). On balance, longer-maturity

loans tend to have higher default risks, partly

because such loans have a higher risk of fall-

ing deep into a negative equity position, which

can lead to consumer defaults. The share of

of credit performance has been broad based, with delinquency rates leveling off across credit

score and income groups.6 The overall increase in credit card delinquencies since early 2022 was

attributable primarily to elevated delinquencies among borrowers with a nonprime credit score

and reflected in large part looser underwriting standards and large growth in inflation-adjusted

revolving credit over the pandemic period.

Delinquencies on student loan debt increased significantly in the first half of 2025, reflecting

the resumption of student loan repayments and reporting of delinquent loans to credit bureaus.

However, student loan borrowers have not yet shown much greater difficulty in meeting their non-

student loan debt payments relative to the overall population.

Vulnerabilities associated with financial leverage remained notable

While banks and broker-dealers have maintained solid capital positions, leverage for some

other types of financial entities—such as hedge funds and life insurers—was elevated relative to

historical standards. When taken together, the overall level of vulnerability due to financial-sector

The banking system remained sound and resilient, but many banks continued to carry fair value

losses that are not reflected in their regulatory capital ratios. Leverage at broker-dealers stayed

near historically low levels. However, the potential for strains on the willingness of dealers to

intermediate during periods of market stress remained a vulnerability to Treasury markets.

Banks maintained historically high levels of regulatory capital, but 
their fair value losses and exposure to interest rate risk remained 
sizable

Robust capital positions allow banks to pursue growth opportunities while providing a cushion

against unexpected losses. The common equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio, a regulatory risk-based mea-

The income-generating capacity of banks is an additional potential source of resiliency, as banks

can accrete capital to buffer against future losses by retaining a portion of their current earnings.

A decline in interest rates caused the fair value of banks’ fixed-rate assets to increase over the

first half of 2025, but fair value losses remained sizable. As of June 30, 2025, the fair values

7 The return on equity for large non–G-SIBs (global systemically important banks) as a group fluctuated in the first half 
of 2025 due to one-off effects stemming from acquisitions involving two banks. Third-quarter earnings calls through 
the data close showed a sizable increase in the return on equity for large banks relative to the third quarter of 2024.

values by $143 billion and $251 billion, respectively (figure 3.3). The duration of banks’ securities

rates—remained elevated, although it has decreased significantly from its peak level in 2022.