Conclusion ............................................................................................................................... 43

Conclusion ................................................................................................................................. 65

Conclusion ................................................................................................................................. 84

Markets were pulled in different directions during the period under review.1 Long-
term government bond yields in core markets rose despite easing monetary policies, 
tightening financial conditions. In contrast, corporate credit remained buoyant, equity 
valuations stayed elevated and US dollar appreciation halted. This resulted in easier 
conditions despite the uncertain outlook, which seemed not fully priced in financial 
markets. Sentiment towards emerging market economies (EMEs) remained subdued, 
as investors struggled to ascertain their outlook amid diverse domestic conditions 
and global policy uncertainty.

While policy rates came down, long-term yields generally rose across major 
economies. The upward shift was initially driven by US yields and spilled over to other 
major markets. The moves went alongside large swings in real yields – spearheaded 
by term premia, shifts in market-based gauges of neutral rates and, in some 
jurisdictions, uncertainty about the fiscal outlook. Indeed, heightened investor unease 
with abundant bond supply seemed to add to the pressures of diminishing risk-
insensitive demand, as quantitative tightening continued. Overall, yield curves in 
major economies thus steepened further and were solidly upward-sloping. Yet, 
although the rise in the 10-year US benchmark largely reversed late in the review 
period, long yields in other jurisdictions remained at significantly higher levels.

Irrespective of the bond market ebbs and flows, and brief episodes of heightened 
volatility, risky assets exhibited resilience across AEs. Risk-taking was especially 
pronounced in corporate credit markets, with credit spreads narrowing further, 
particularly in Europe. Leveraged loans and private credit continued to pick up pace 
on the back of resurgent leveraged buyout (LBO) and merger and acquisition (M&A) 
activity. Stock markets in most advanced economies (AEs) traded sideways but stayed 
at relatively high valuations. European stocks surprised with a vigorous rally, 
outperforming most other markets on the back of markedly improved sentiment. A 
few jitters in the wake of AI-related developments and key policy announcements, 
including on tariffs, were not enough to derail the predominantly positive sentiment.

Financial conditions were more mixed across EMEs, but the overall sentiment was 
subdued. Headwinds seemed to gather strength from a pause in the Federal Reserve’s 
easing trajectory, uncertainty with regard to US trade policy and a still struggling 
Chinese economy. While the breather in the US dollar appreciation provided some 
relief, local currency government bond yields lingered at elevated levels. Yields rose 
sharply in some economies where fiscal concerns came into investors’ focus. 
Conditions in stock markets differed across countries. Chinese equities staged a rally 
late in the review period, driven mainly by technology stocks, while others saw tepid 
performance, despite a few bright spots that emerged in regional stock markets. 
Sentiment was lukewarm, however, reflected in anaemic portfolio flows that 
essentially drew to a standstill.

• 
Despite policy easing, long-term government bond yields saw upward pressure across advanced 
economies, with fluctuations in real yields and term premia as the biggest drivers of yield moves.

• 
Risky assets exhibited resilience despite brief bouts of volatility and lingering concerns over tariffs, with 
robust risk-taking in corporate credit and European stocks.

• 
Sentiment was subdued in emerging market economies, as investors struggled to gauge the outlook for 
them amid varied domestic conditions and global policy uncertainty.

Bond markets reflected most clearly the cross-currents of uncertainty. Long-term 
yields whipsawed in AEs but finished the review period higher despite policy easing 
by major central banks. The swings in bond yields largely owed to fluctuating real 
yields amid an upward drift in inflation compensation. In some countries, the upward 
move was bolstered by unfavourable market dynamics and heightened investor 
unease with fiscal outlooks.

banks, including the Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank, also hinted at a pause 
in policy easing. The ECB, however, lowered policy rates and indicated that further 
cuts might be needed in the light of slower than expected growth. In contrast, the 
Bank of Japan raised rates once again, as it continued with its process of policy 
normalisation. These policy moves, and expectations thereof, were reflected in a 
downward trend in short-term rates.

In contrast to short-term rates, long rates soared in December, initially boosted 
by strong macroeconomic data. In the United States, 10-year yields rose by more than 
60 basis points before largely retracing that surge from mid-January onwards 
(Graph 1.A, solid red line). These swings in long-term rates were driven by real yields, 
while inflation compensation edged up during the period (Graph 1.B). Inflation 
readings across major economies stayed above target throughout 2024 and ticked 
up at year-end (Graph 1.C). The persistence of inflation, together with the resilience 
of labour markets, particularly in the United States, pushed rates higher as investors 
reassessed the prospects of a prolonged period of higher policy rates. In this market 
environment, the rise in US yields pulled up those in other major economies early in 
the review period (Box A). As US yields subsequently came down in February, rates in 
other major economies traded sideways.

The rise of long-term rates led to a material steepening of yield curves. Term 
spreads turned solidly positive in most AEs, particularly in non-US markets 
(Graph 2.A). The yield curve steepening was exacerbated by a notable increase in term 
premia (Graph 2.B), indicating that investors demanded greater compensation for 
holding long-term interest rate exposure. Moreover, market-based gauges of neutral 
interest rates also rose steadily throughout the review period, and especially sharply 
for the euro area (Graph 2.C).

The increase in term premia coincided with market signals of abundant 
government bond supply. For instance, interest rate swap spreads – the difference 
between the fixed rate leg of an interest rate swap and government bond yields of

Short-term funding markets in the United States also reflected the influence of 
more abundant bond collateral, in combination with typical year-end constraints on 
dealer intermediation. The spread between the US overnight repo rate and the 
effective federal funds rate experienced a significant spike towards the end of 2024 
(Graph 3.B, red line). This spike appeared to reflect the heightened need for repo 
financing to accommodate large Treasury issuances and constraints on dealers’ 
balance sheet space due to end-of-year regulatory reporting requirements. No such 
jumps were observed in Europe or Japan (blue and yellow lines, respectively), where 
bond collateral at this juncture seems relatively less abundant.

The appreciation of the US dollar peaked and then reversed during the review 
period. While the greenback gained some additional ground in December, reaching 
its highest parity since late 2022, it retraced its path from mid-January as doubts 
about the US growth outlook began to mount (Graph 3.C). This turnaround was not 
uniform across currencies, as some commodity currencies and the yen still 
depreciated further.

2 
It is noteworthy that these spreads are negative since private financial instruments typically carry 
higher risks (eg credit risk) such that corresponding yields should in principle be higher than those 
of government bonds. The uncommon sight of government bonds yielding more than private sector 
instruments suggests that investors and intermediaries are demanding higher compensation to 
absorb government debt supply, although to different degrees across countries. For a discussion of 
the drivers of interest rate swap spreads, see M Aquilina, A Schrimpf, V Sushko and D Xia , “Negative 
interest rate swap spreads signal pressure in government debt absorption”, BIS Quarterly Review, 
December 2024.

Core bond yields in advanced economies (AEs) moved up in tandem in the last few months, despite increased 
macroeconomic divergence. Since the start of the ongoing monetary policy cycle in early 2022, the US economy 
has been widely outperforming most of its AE peers, in terms of both realised growth and outlook. Under those 
conditions, interest rates would typically be expected to decouple, with US rates exhibiting more upward 
momentum than those of other AEs. Instead, US yields have been setting the tone for global yields, pulling up 
other AE yields, particularly in the second half of 2024. This box quantifies the extent of US rate spillovers to 
other AE rates and explores some of the potential drivers.

US yields pulled those in other AEs as US spillovers intensified 
Graph A1

B. …as US yields pulled AE yields on 
the way up2

C. Macro news in the US has an 
increasing impact on other major 
AEs3

The parallel upward shift in AE bond yields has been spearheaded by spillovers from US bond markets. The 
surge in US interest rates in the second half of 2024 has exerted a gravitational pull on the yields of other major 
economies. For instance, around a third of the variance of unexpected changes in the 10-year yields of Germany 
and the United Kingdom can be attributed to unexpected changes in US 10-year yields (Graph A1.B, red line).

The magnitude of the spillovers intensified quickly in the second half of 2024 and spiked at the beginning 
of 2025 as long-term rates in the US continued their upward march. In contrast, the spillovers from other major 
economies’ yields to US rates receded gradually in 2024 and plummeted in the new year (blue line). In summary, 
US Treasuries have had much larger effects on AE bond markets than the other way around.

The larger spillovers from US bond markets seem related to the increasing impact of macroeconomic 
developments in the United States on bond yields of other major economies. Macroeconomic surprises in US 
economic data, ie the difference between actual release and consensus forecasts, are inducing larger market 
responses abroad. For instance, US labour market news during 2023–24 had an effect (Graph A1.C, red bars) 
about four times larger than the one typically observed in the previous decade (red dots). A similar pattern also 
holds for US inflation surprises (blue bars and dots), which had very little to no impact on AE yields before 2023 
but have become very important since then as a driver of core bond yields.

This latest phase of highly synchronised increases in AE yields highlights the global influence of US yields. 
Several factors can be underlying these moves. First, adjustments in interest rates by the Federal Reserve have 
significant spillover effects on global financial markets by shaping investor expectations and sentiment 
globally. Second, spillovers could stem from international portfolio flows as global investors rebalance their 
portfolio and transmit shocks of US yields to other AEs. US bond yields’ disproportionate influence on other 
AEs, with limited reciprocal effects, further supports the notion of asymmetric spillovers and underscores the 
dominant role of the United States in global financial markets.

Pricing of risky assets remains in hot territory

Risky asset markets remained resilient during the review period, shrugging off 
uncertainties about the outlook. Buoyant credit markets and elevated equity 
valuations countervailed the pressure from rising long-term bond yields, contributing 
to an easing of financial conditions in AEs.

Risk sentiment in equity markets remained largely intact, even though the 
performance of individual markets varied across major economies. European stocks 
surprised with a strong rally and outperformed US equities, which traded sideways 
like those of most other jurisdictions (Graph 4.A). Accordingly, valuations (as 
measured here by price/dividend ratios) remained elevated in the United States and 
increased materially in Europe (Graph 4.B). US market valuations were supported by 
strong earnings, particularly from technology firms (Graph 4.C). These companies 
performed well and sustained the US market, while the post-election surge in small 
cap stocks faded away. Across the Atlantic, investors shrugged off weaker than 
expected earnings, consistent with relatively weaker economies. The surge appeared 
driven by a large compression of the European equity risk premium and by the strong 
rally of banks – whose earnings continued showing strength – and other sectors that 
had been particularly shaken in the first quarter of 2022 (Box B).

Despite the solid equity performance in most AEs, bouts of volatility returned 
briefly during the period. The VIX spiked in the wake of the Federal Open Market 
Committee meeting in December, increasing by more than 70% on the day of the 
policy decision announcement. The substantial jump in volatility underscored the 
swift and pronounced market response to a reassessment of beliefs about the 
monetary policy path ahead. However, the increase was short-lived as contrarian 
investors and sellers of volatility presumably dampened the move. Markets were also 
jittery in late January on the back of risk-off sentiment related to artificial intelligence 
(AI) and in late February to early March on deteriorating investor confidence following 
a softening of growth signals and tariff-related news.

Corporate funding markets remained robust, with issuers taking advantage of 
the resilient risk sentiment. Credit spreads compressed further across the rating 
spectrum, particularly for European high-yield bonds, and stayed widely below 
historical watermarks (Graph 5.A). In this context, issuance remained strong even in 
the lower-grade segments. Leveraged loan issuance picked up pace (Graph 5.B, red 
line) amid the continued resurgence of LBO activity (Graph 5.C, blue line). Finally, the 
long dormant initial public offering (IPO) market extended its 2024 recovery (red line), 
with a sizeable number of firms brought public and strong first-day performance, 
particularly during the fourth quarter.

Other corners of private markets also benefited from the positive sentiment. 
Private credit continued to exhibit strong momentum and closed the year at strength, 
despite losing some ground to banks’ leveraged lending. Venture capital funds saw 
strong fundraising given the sustained interest of investors in AI bets. The growth 
investment segment also saw a material improvement, amid a flurry of mergers and 
acquisitions.

In contrast to the pressures faced by traditional safe havens, the price of gold 
sustained its strong upward momentum and gained pace during the review 
period – yet another case of markets being subject to cross-currents. Gold prices rose 
steadily during the period, irrespective of the wide fluctuations elsewhere (Graph 6.A). 
The 2024 rally in gold prices was unusual, as it coincided with a stronger US dollar 
and increasing real yields (Graph 6.B). In the crypto space, bitcoin lost momentum 
while ether plummeted (Graph 6.C).

Why have European stocks recently outperformed their US peers?

European stock markets outperformed their US peers, and most other global markets, in the new year. Despite 
the broad economic challenges faced by the region, including a tepid earnings outlook, high energy prices and 
the threat of tariffs, the EURO STOXX 50 index outstripped the S&P 500 by about 15 percentage points since 
early December (Graph B1.A). Other European indices in the United Kingdom and elsewhere also garnered strong 
gains. As a result, key valuation metrics in European equities, such as the price/dividend ratio, also improved by 
a similar margin versus the United States. In this box, we explore the drivers of this European outperformance 
and find that risk premium compression – investors’ more benign sentiment regarding European stocks – has 
been the main driving force.

Risk premia compression drove the outperformance of European stocks 
Graph B1

To understand the outperformance of European indices, it is useful to study the components of the 
price/dividend ratio. Conceptually, the index price itself should be equal to the discounted value of future 
expected dividends. As a result, changes in the price/dividend ratio can be decomposed into three main parts, 
which reflect discount rates or cash flows: (i) changes in risk-free rates; (ii) changes in equity risk premia; and (iii) 
changes in expected dividend growth. A rise in the first two components reduces the price/dividend ratio as 
higher risk-free rates or risk premia cause future cash flows to be discounted more heavily. In contrast, a rise in 
the third component increases the price/dividend ratio as it signals higher future dividends (ie cash flows).

A decomposition along the lines just discussed reveals that risk premium compression has been the main 
force driving the recent outperformance in European stocks. During the review period, the price/dividend ratio

for US stocks remained unchanged on average, while that of European stocks increased significantly (Graph 
B1.B, red dots). The rise in long-term rates put downward pressure on the price/dividend ratio in both the United 
States and Europe (yellow bars). An additional negative factor for European valuations was deteriorating 
expected dividend growth (red bars) in contrast to the improving figures for their US peers. On balance, the 
dominant factor that pulled up European stock market valuations despite the two countervailing headwinds was 
the large compression of the risk premia on European equities (blue bars).

Lower equity risk premia imply that investors demand less compensation for holding European stocks, 
increasing valuations. Several factors may underlie this more positive sentiment shift towards European stocks. 
First, high-frequency economic indicators have improved for Europe in recent months, in contrast to the United 
States (Graph B1.B, purple bars). Second, looser monetary policy in the short and medium term may shield some 
of these firms from threats like tariffs, not least by helping to keep exchange rates steady at current parities. 
Finally, the prospects of a more stable political situation in core European markets and perhaps even the 
potential easing of geopolitical conflicts in the region may have contributed to a general improvement in 
investors’ sentiment towards European assets.

Consistent with improving sentiment and risk-taking in anticipation of an easing of geopolitical conflicts, 
most of the recent outperformance of European markets was driven by cyclical sectors. These sectors, such as 
consumer discretionary, banks and information technology, saw significant gains compared with their US 
counterparts during the review period (Graph B1.C, blue bars). Moreover, European sectors that could benefit 
from a sooner end to the war in Ukraine, via lower energy costs – such as energy, industrials and materials – 
also outperformed their US peers. These same sectors significantly underperformed during the period of rapid 
heightening of geopolitical uncertainty that surrounded Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 (red bars). 
Hence, the recent shift could at least partly reflect more positive sentiment and optimism about economic 
stability and growth in Europe in a context of de-escalating geopolitical tensions.

Financial conditions in EMEs generally tightened, but to differing degrees. The dollar 
provided mild relief as its appreciation against EME currencies took a breather. But 
headwinds gained strength amid generally mediocre macroeconomic conditions, the 
threat of tariffs and still sluggish growth in the Chinese economy.

Central banks’ decisions reflected the diverse domestic conditions and 
constraints from the Federal Reserve pausing its easing. In Latin America, most central 
banks cut rates during the review period, as their easing cycle may not be completed 
yet. Brazil was the exception, hiking rates by 200 basis points in the midst of persistent 
inflationary pressures. In other parts of the world, notably in Europe and Asia, policy 
rate cuts were prevalent. In China, benchmark loan prime rates remained stable while 
the central bank ramped up measures to stabilise the renminbi exchange rate.

The appreciation of the US dollar stalled during this review period, and several 
EME currencies appreciated against the greenback. That was particularly the case of 
Latin American and EMEA (European, Middle Eastern and African) currencies, which 
largely rebounded from their pronounced Q4 2024 slide amid wide fluctuations

Financial conditions remained more subdued in EMEs as rates increased 
Graph 7

(Graph 7.A, red and yellow lines). Asian EME currencies also saw ample swings in their 
parities, as US trade policy uncertainty mounted, and slightly depreciated over the 
review period (Graph 7.A, blue line). Carry trade activity, where investors borrow in 
low-yielding currencies to invest in higher-yielding ones, was likely limited as high 
volatility made the returns on such trades riskier and less attractive. That said, the 
conjuncture could quickly change, as evidenced by the August 2024 episode.3

Yields on government bonds in domestic currency generally saw upward 
pressure, tightening financial conditions. Yields whipsawed in Latin America and 
EMEA and stayed largely unchanged in Asia. The rise was particularly sharp at the 
long end of Brazil’s term structure, as fiscal concerns took centre stage in investors’ 
view. Other countries in Latin America saw more stable yields, in coincidence with 
developments in other regions (Graph 7.B).

Issuance of dollar-denominated bonds was mixed despite falling spreads. The 
easier financial conditions of AE credit markets reflected more clearly on the spreads 
of dollar-denominated bonds, which compressed by about 20 basis points 
(Graph 7.C). Despite that compression, sovereign issuance remained generally 
circumspect, especially in the high-yield segment, although it gained some traction 
in February within the investment grade sovereign segment.

EME stock markets trended downwards on average, adding to the tightening 
pressure on financial conditions. Chinese equity markets saw a rebound in February 
after months-long weakness, and ended the period flat (Graph 8.A, red line) on the 
back of improving sentiment and optimism related to the outlook for AI. This sudden 
awakening of the continental market was also reflected in Hong Kong SAR equities, 
whose valuations soared. Additionally, there were bright spots in some small Latin

American markets and in EMEA, the latter seemingly pulled by the momentum of the 
major European exchanges (Graph 8.B). Moreover, India’s IPO market continued its 
strong performance in the fourth quarter, having contributed a sizeable volume share 
to the global IPO market in 2024.

Overall, however, sentiment towards EMEs remained downcast. With attractive 
yields on safe debt of AEs, foreign investors in EME debt securities extended the 
caution that characterised the last quarter of 2024. Portfolio flows turned negative for 
emerging Asia, in line with the lacklustre stock performance and lower yields 
(Graph 8.C). Flows into other EMEs also weakened, reflecting the overall anaemic 
sentiment.

Private credit has grown rapidly over the past two decades and expanded into more and more 
industries. Cross-country evidence shows that the footprint of private credit is larger in countries 
with lower policy rates, more stringent banking regulation and a less efficient banking sector. 
Examining the cost of capital of business development companies (BDCs), an important private 
credit investment vehicle, reveals that banks’ initial funding advantage has substantially 
narrowed since 2010. The convergence in the cost of capital reflects a fall in BDCs’ cost of equity 
relative to that of banks and a rise in BDCs’ leverage. Private credit’s growth has therefore been 
bolstered, at least in part, by a relative improvement in its funding cost.

Private credit funds have increased their assets under management (AUM) from about 
$0.2 billion in the early 2000s to over $2,500 billion today. As private credit’s footprint 
in the financial system develops, interest is growing among regulators and in public 
policy circles in understanding its drivers and attendant financial stability implications.

This article explores global patterns in the growth of private credit and 
contributes to the literature by systematically studying its underlying drivers with 
detailed loan-level data. Moreover, it examines how changes in the cost of capital 
may have supported the growth of private credit vis-à-vis banks.

Three findings emerge from our analysis.

First, while private credit has grown rapidly and serves an increasing variety of 
industries, the loan portfolios of individual funds remain heavily concentrated. 
Portfolio specialisation in narrow industries can yield benefits through lenders’ 
superior screening and monitoring capabilities – improving credit access for riskier 
and more opaque firms. However, a lack of diversification could expose funds to 
sector-specific downturns, which requires investors – up to now mostly institutional 
– to diversify their portfolios of private credit assets. The trade-off between 
specialisation and diversification is bound to gain prominence as AUM continue to

• 
A fall in the cost of equity and a rise in the leverage of business development companies (BDCs), an 
important private credit investment vehicle, have narrowed the gap between the cost of capital for banks 
and BDCs. This suggests that the growth in private credit partly stems from declining funding costs.

grow and fund managers seek avenues for greater participation by retail investors, 
who may be less aware of the concentration risks involved.

Second, the footprint of private credit is larger in countries with lower policy 
rates, less efficient banking systems and, to some extent, more stringent banking 
regulation. In a panel covering private credit loans for 45 countries between 2010 and 
2019, all three variables have a statistically significant impact on loan originations by 
private credit funds. In terms of economic magnitude, the efficiency of the local 
banking system has the largest impact, followed by the level of the policy rate.

Third, the gap between the cost of capital of banks and business development 
companies (BDCs), an important private credit investment vehicle, has narrowed 
substantially since 2010. The spread between the cost of capital of publicly listed 
BDCs and that of banks has declined by around 200 basis points (bp) between the 
Great Financial Crisis (GFC) and 2019. The narrowing of the spread reflects a relative 
increase in banks’ cost of equity in the aftermath of the GFC as well as a steady 
increase in BDC leverage. These patterns suggest that at least part of the rise of 
private credit has been supported by a relative improvement in its cost of funding.

lighter regulation. The life cycle of funds usually matches the average maturity of their 
loan portfolios, which mitigates liquidity and maturity transformation risks.

Portfolio concentration yields benefits but also entails risks. Specialisation in 
narrow markets provides a deeper understanding of borrower characteristics and 
improves lenders’ ability to monitor and manage loans. Specialised lenders can hence

offer more favourable loan terms, such as larger loans, lower risk-adjusted interest 
rates and longer maturities, and they are more willing to lend to smaller, opaque firms 
within their area of expertise. At the same time, greater diversification reduces 
exposure to region- or industry-specific shocks, mitigating credit risks.8

Should the share of retail investors rise, private credit funds may need to reassess 
the merits of specialisation. The purported advantages of funds relative to banks – 
superior screening and monitoring as well as bespoke loan terms – require some 
specialisation. But specialisation leaves funds exposed to idiosyncratic risks. As asset 
managers explore options to attract retail investors, who might have a limited 
understanding of the risks involved, funds may need to opt for greater portfolio 
diversification. Indeed, that may even become a regulatory requirement in some 
jurisdictions. But greater diversification could erode their competitive advantage of 
local expertise.

We now study the factors underlying the rising footprint of private credit globally. 
Motivated by the literature, we examine four hypotheses.

The first hypothesis is that lower interest rates have contributed to the rise of 
private credit. They could have done this in several ways. For one, a low-for-long 
period might have induced institutional investors to search for yield and steer their 
portfolios towards private credit funds, lowering their funding costs. For another, a 
steady decline in policy rates could have eroded bank profitability. Low nominal

8 
For example, diversified banks are less risky (Goetz et al (2016)), which translates into lower funding 
costs (Levine et al (2021), Doerr (2024)) as well as better access to wholesale funding and more 
lending during crises (Doerr and Schaz (2021)).

interest rates mean a narrower spread between assets and liabilities because deposit 
rates adjust slowly to market rates (Drechsler et al (2017), Sarto and Wang (2023)). 
Bank profitability thus falls as policy rates trend downward, depressing banks’ net 
worth and curtailing loan supply (Abadi et al (2023)). Private credit funds, which are 
wholesale financed at market rates and extend floating rate loans, face no such 
spread compression. Thus, they could have gained market share at the expense of 
banks during the low rate period.

The second hypothesis is that private credit fills unmet demand for credit in 
general. About 10% of all small and medium-sized firms in advanced economies (AEs) 
and over 20% in emerging market economies (EMEs) report being credit constrained, 
often due to a lack of collateral (Caballero et al (2025)). The growth of direct lending 
by private credit, providing uncollateralised loans with tailored covenants to small 
and medium-sized firms, could stem from the needs of firms underserved banks.

Third, stricter regulation for banks has spurred lending by private credit funds. 
Post-crisis banking regulation likely reduced banks’ willingness to lend to risky firms.9 
Faced with an increase in the cost of bank credit, riskier firms may turn to non-bank 
lenders, including BDCs (Chernenko et al (2022), Davydiuk et al (2024)).

And fourth, rising leverage among non-financial corporations (NFCs) could have 
enlarged the footprint of private credit. Private credit funds are more willing to lend 
to highly leveraged borrowers. The substantial increase in NFC leverage in many 
countries over recent decades could therefore have coincided with increased lending 
by private credit funds.

9 
Cortés et al (2020) and Doerr (2021) show that post-crisis stress tests in the United States have 
reduced banks’ credit supply to small and young firms in riskier markets. For Europe, Gropp et al 
(2019) show that an increase in capital requirements made banks reduce their risk-weighted assets, 
in particular loans to riskier corporations. For a discussion, see also Kashyap et al (2010). However, 
why banks have reduced their lending while more equity-dependent lenders have increased theirs 
remains an interesting question for future research.

Table 1 shows that originations of direct loans are higher when policy rates are 
lower, when the financial institutions index is lower – ie when banks are less capable 
to serve loan demand – and when the levels of bank regulatory stringency and total 
NFC leverage are higher.10 These findings are consistent with the hypotheses laid out 
above. In terms of economic significance, a one standard deviation decrease in the 
policy rate (4.14%) is associated with an increase in private credit of about 12%. The 
average decline in policy rates observed between 2007 and 2017 in the median 
country in our sample is about 4 percentage points, which implies a significant impact 
on private credit. Similarly, a one standard deviation decrease in the FI index of 0.17 
points is associated with an increase in private credit activity of about 33%. To put 
this into perspective, a difference of 0.17 points corresponds to roughly half the 
difference between AEs and EMEs in our sample.11 The smallest effects are 
attributable to bank regulation stringency and NFC leverage, where a one standard 
deviation increase is associated with an increase in private credit activity of around 
7%.

10 
Our results remain robust across various regression specifications that (i) exclude the US from our 
sample; (ii) include time fixed effects, thereby controlling for global factors; (iii) use alternative 
measures of banking sector developments; and (iv) exclude the bank stringency variable, allowing us 
to estimate the regressions on a longer sample (2001–21).

11 
The median values of the FI index in our sample of AEs and EMEs are 0.79 and 0.43, respectively. The 
FI index varies mainly across countries rather than over time, ie our estimate captures the tendency 
of countries with lower FI index values to have more private credit.

Demand shocks contributed relatively more to the overall growth in private credit between 2005 and 2012 
(reflected by the steeper line in Graph A1.A). This may have been due to difficulties faced by small and medium-
sized firms in accessing traditional bank credit. These underserved firms turned to private credit funds, which 
were able to meet their financing needs with more flexible and tailored lending solutions.

Supply shocks dominated from 2010 to 2019, when private credit grew rapidly (Graph A1.B). This period 
coincides with tighter banking regulation and historically low interest rates, when attractive yields started 
drawing institutional investors more broadly into private markets. These forces likely lowered credit funds’ cost 
of capital, boosting their loan supply.

The rise of private credit is due to shifting demand and supply factors over 
different periods, with demand factors being more influential before the GFC and 
supply factors driving growth from 2010 onwards. To disentangle demand and supply 
factors, we apply statistical methods to the average interest rate on private credit 
deals over the policy rate and the total number of private credit deals in the United 
States (Box A). A historical decomposition suggests that demand factors were the 
dominant driver before the GFC, when private credit experienced modest growth in 
general. Demand factors might have dominated in that period due to a growing 
number of riskier firms or firms with few tangible assets that were underserved by 
traditional banks. Funds’ credit supply, however, emerges as the more important 
driver from 2010 onwards, when private credit grew particularly strongly. Supply 
factors could be attributable to a decline in funding costs for private credit funds, 
possibly spurred by low policy rates. This finding is consistent with our hypothesis 
that the low-for-long period contributed to the rise of private credit.

To better understand how private credit funds compete with banks, we examine their 
cost of capital. A lower cost of capital allows lenders to offer loans at lower rates, 
thereby attracting more borrowers and expanding their market share.

Banks’ CoE was broadly similar to that of BDCs up until 2009 but has been higher 
since then (Graph 4.A, red line). It increased by substantially more than that of BDCs 
(blue line) during the GFC, likely reflecting the higher stock market variability of banks 
due to concerns about their health. Following the GFC, except for a brief period

during the Covid-19 pandemic, a sizeable gap persisted, in part reflecting the 
generally much higher leverage of banks.14

BDCs’ CoD has been slightly higher than that of banks, and more so during 
periods of monetary tightening (Graph 4.B). During the three hiking cycles by the 
Federal Reserve starting in mid-2004, early 2016 and early 2022, BDCs’ CoD increased 
by somewhat more than that of banks. These patterns reflect that BDCs are mostly 
wholesale financed at rates that move closely with the policy rate. Bank debt also 
comprises deposits with “sticky” rates that increase by less than the policy rate, 
implying an attenuated increase in funding costs when interest rates rise.15

Combining both series, we find that BDCs’ cost of capital was relatively higher 
than that of banks in the pre-GFC period but that the series have converged since 
then (Graph 4.C). The WACC of BDCs (blue line) was around 200 bp higher than that 
of banks (red line) before the GFC, suggesting that banks enjoyed a material funding 
advantage at the time. Between 2010 and 2019, the spread declined by about 250 bp, 
with a pronounced drop during the GFC and in its immediate aftermath.16

14 
Another explanation for the persistent gap could be more stringent capital requirements, but the 
evidence is mixed. Baker and Wurgler (2015) show that capital regulation increases the cost of capital 
and loan rates by raising the cost of equity due to the so-called low-risk anomaly in equity markets. 
The anomaly refers to the counterintuitive observation that lower-risk stocks can generate higher 
risk-adjusted returns than higher-risk stocks. Using an alternative approach, Dick-Nielsen et al (2022) 
confirm the low-risk anomaly in equity markets but do not find evidence of regulation increasing the 
cost of capital for banks.

15 
Bloomberg’s CoD measure likely overstates the cost of deposits for banks, as it assumes they pay the 
same rate as other short-term debt, potentially leading to an overestimation of the cost of debt and 
capital for banks. Adjusting the CoD for observed deposit rates leads to a level shift, reducing banks’ 
CoD and WACC. However, dynamics relative to BDCs remain unaffected (see Annex A).

16 
For expositional clarity we omit the volatile period after 2019.

Further analysis indicates that the narrowing of the spread between the cost of 
capital of banks and BDCs is largely explained by a fall in BDCs’ cost of equity and a 
material increase in their leverage. To establish this, we compute three counterfactual 
time series of the spread between the WACC of banks and that of BDCs. First, we 
allow only the cost of debt of banks and BDCs to vary over time, while holding their 
cost of equity and capital structure, ie the shares of debt and equity in total capital, 
constant at their respective pre-2007 averages. Second, we vary only the cost of 
equity but fix the cost of debt and the capital structure. Third, we allow only the capital 
structure to vary while keeping the cost of equity and debt fixed. The three series 
illustrate the relative contributions of changes in lenders’ cost of debt, cost of equity 
and capital structure to changes in the spread between the WACC of banks and BDCs.

The cost of equity has contributed substantially to narrowing the WACC spread 
between banks and BDCs, particularly in the immediate aftermath of the GFC. The 
decline in BDCs’ CoE relative to banks between 2009 and 2011 contributed almost 
100 bp to the decline in the spread (Graph 5.A, yellow line), with subsequent changes 
being more gradual.

A steady increase in BDC leverage was the other main contributor to the 
narrowing of funding costs between banks and BDCs. Changes in the capital 
structure, ie shifts in the importance of equity vs debt, contributed about 150 bp to 
the decline in the spread after 2010 (Graph 5.A, blue line). The main driver was an 
increase in BDC leverage. Since 2011 BDCs’ debt-to-equity ratio increased from 
around 0.4 to over 1 on average (Graph 5.B, blue line). Correspondingly, the share of 
debt in their WACC increased (red line).

Finally, changes in the cost of debt had little impact on the cost of capital spread 
overall. If anything, the CoD of BDCs trended slightly upwards with respect to that of 
banks (Graph 5.A, purple line). This pattern likely reflects the relatively small difference 
between banks’ and BDCs’ cost of debt during the low rate period.

The rise in leverage is potentially driven by BDCs’ use of cheap debt during the 
low rate period. The attendant decline in the cost of capital despite rising leverage 
suggests that the benefits of cheaper debt financing outweigh the costs of increased 
risk to equity investors as BDCs levered up.17 Additional research is warranted to 
understand the reasons for the substantial decline in BDCs’ funding costs compared 
with those of banks.

Taken together, the evidence suggests that the growth of BDCs was driven, at 
least in part, by a decline in their cost of capital relative to that of banks. The patterns 
uncovered in this section are consistent with the broader finding that supply factors 
were the primary drivers of private credit’s fast rise after 2011 (Box A). That said, BDCs 
have also experienced rapid growth in the years after 2020, although their cost of 
capital relative to that of banks has remained constant. This development could imply 
that some of the growth of BDC lending, or of private credit more generally, stems 
from its genuine ability to cater to the needs of firms underserved by banks.

This article has examined the growth and drivers of private credit. The footprint of 
private credit is larger in countries with lower policy rates, more stringent banking 
regulations and less efficient banking sectors. Moreover, evidence from the United 
States suggests that BDCs’ cost of capital relative to that of banks has steadily 
declined over the past decade, eroding banks’ initial funding advantage.

Our analysis informs the debate on how the relationship between banks and 
private credit could evolve and affect the nature of financial intermediation and 
financial stability going forward.

Private credit could complement the existing bank-based system and bring 
financial stability benefits. Banks are primarily financed via short-term deposits, and 
uninsured deposits are prone to runs. Private credit funds, with their closed-end 
structure and matched maturity of assets and liabilities, may be better positioned to 
hold long-term loans and attendant risks.

An open question is to what extent private credit funds are better at originating, 
screening and monitoring loans. Their specialisation in narrow market segments 
could provide informational advantages, and borrowers appear to value the flexible 
terms of private loans. It remains to be seen whether the expected returns of private 
credit are commensurate with the risk-taking involved or whether lending standards 
deteriorate in the face of continued credit expansion – in particular because private 
credit, being a fairly young asset class, has not yet gone through a full credit cycle. At 
the very least, the increasing prevalence of partnerships between private credit funds 
and banks suggests that banks, which have the customer relationships, loan officers 
and ability to provide liquidity through eg lines of credit, might still have an 
advantage in arranging loans.

Another question is whether private credit funds can maintain their comparative 
edge. As the leverage of BDCs – and private credit funds more generally – increases,

17 
One possibility is that with falling default probabilities and improving economic conditions after the 
height of the GFC and euro area sovereign debt crisis, BDCs were able to increase leverage without 
escalating their cost of debt and cost of equity, capitalising on enhanced creditworthiness and 
investor appetite for yield.

their advantage in holding risk may diminish. If private credit succeeds in attracting 
more retail investors, eg by migrating to more open-ended structures, liquidity 
mismatches between assets and liabilities would ultimately rise. Private credit would 
then be increasingly subject to similar vulnerabilities to banks. Relatedly, with the era 
of persistently low interest rates coming to an end, the fall in BDCs’ cost of capital 
may reverse. In addition, as retail investors may have a limited understanding of 
funds’ portfolio concentration, striking the right balance between specialisation and 
diversification within funds is bound to become more challenging. Indeed, funds may 
dilute their competitive advantage of local expertise if they diversify.

From a financial stability perspective, developments in funds’ investor base, 
including the growing role of insurance companies and retail investors, as well as 
funds’ leverage and degree of portfolio concentration warrant monitoring. This is 
especially relevant in light of growing interlinkages between banks and private credit.

Recent and upcoming reviews of monetary policy frameworks have been putting the spotlight on 
the evolution of inflation targeting. This article provides context by using a new database of 
changes to the inflation targeting frameworks of 26 central banks since 1990. We use the data 
to track changes in the frameworks’ flexibility in terms of the specification of the inflation target 
and the role of other objectives, ie employment (or output) and financial stability. While the 
specification of the numerical targets has become stricter (eg points rather than ranges), greater 
flexibility has taken the form of less strict / longer horizons to achieve them and more weight on 
other objectives, especially employment/output. These trends are typically more pronounced in 
advanced economies and have widened differences with their emerging market peers.

Inflation targeting has turned 35. Since its birth, it has spread across the globe and 
proved remarkably durable.2 Part of its appeal is to offer central banks a form of 
“constrained discretion” to pursue price stability (Bernanke and Mishkin (1999)). What 
is much less clear is where exactly to strike the balance between constraints and 
discretion. Policymakers and scholars have worried about both too little flexibility 
(eg Alan Greenspan)3 and too much (eg Taylor (2022)). The close attention given to 
recent framework reviews confirms that the optimal specification remains up for 
debate (eg Eggertsson and Kohn (2023)).

• 
The features shaping the flexibility of inflation targeting have evolved substantially since the inception 
of the regime in the early 1990s.

• 
While numerical targets have become stricter (eg points rather than ranges), greater flexibility has taken 
the form of less strict / longer horizons to achieve the targets and greater weight on other objectives, 
especially employment/output.

• 
These trends have typically been stronger in advanced economies, tending to widen differences with 
their emerging market peers.

Three key findings stand out. First, while the specification of the numerical targets 
has become stricter (eg points rather than ranges), the horizon over which to achieve 
them has become less strict, ie vaguer and longer. Second, objectives other than 
inflation, especially employment and output, have gained ground. Third, these trends 
are typically stronger in AEs and have tended to widen differences with their EME 
peers. Overall, the pattern is consistent with the idea that stronger confidence in 
hitting the inflation target and in the framework’s credibility, as reflected in stricter 
numerical targets but longer horizons, has provided the leeway to pursue other 
objectives.

Greater flexibility has benefits as well as possible costs. It helps to reduce the 
economic costs of a strict pursuit of the inflation objective. The costs may be in terms 
of other objectives, such as output and financial stability, or the preservation of price 
stability itself on a more sustainable basis. To use King’s famous expression, no central 
bank is an “inflation nutter” (King (1997)).7 At some point, however, greater flexibility 
may also undermine the regime’s credibility and raise its economic costs more 
generally. The trade-offs involved will depend on the workings of the economy, the 
forces driving it at any given point in time and the broader institutional context.

To construct the four core indicators, we quantify and aggregate the impact on 
flexibility of a number of features of the framework that correspond to each sub-
dimension (orange boxes). Consider the features related to the specification of the 
target and other objectives, in turn.

The specification of the target describes the level of ambition with respect to the 
inflation objective. Flexibility can be achieved in two non-mutually exclusive ways 
(left-hand side of Graph 1): through the specification of the numerical target or 
through the specification of the horizon over which the target is to be achieved. For 
instance, in the case of the numerical target, a range is less restrictive than a point. 
And a target defined in terms of headline inflation is more ambitious (less flexible) 
than one defined in terms of core inflation or with escape clauses (eg excluding 
changes due to taxes and volatile prices): headline is more volatile and hence harder 
to control. In the case of the horizon, the key distinction is between one that is short 
and quantitative versus one that is long and qualitative (eg “over the medium term”).

The required flexibility to pursue an objective other than price stability (right-
hand side of Graph 1) depends on the weight attached to that objective. Thus, for 
each objective, we consider its status (eg primary, secondary or merely a 
consideration) and the level of ambition (eg just mitigating fluctuations in output or 
employment or achieving its maximum level).

Taken together, the four indicators provide a multifaceted picture of a given 
inflation targeting framework’s degree of flexibility. With each core indicator ranging 
from 0 (minimum flexibility) to 1 (maximum), the most flexible central bank would be 
one that scored 1 for each of the four core indicators. Concretely, this would 
correspond to a central bank that: (i) targeted a wide range for core inflation over a 
qualitative long horizon; and (ii) considered real activity and financial stability as 
objectives on a par with price stability and had ambitious goals for both. This would 
be the case if the central bank aimed at maximum employment and used monetary 
policy explicitly to lean against the build-up of financial imbalances.

While, in principle, it would be possible to aggregate across sub-dimensions and 
construct a single indicator of flexibility, we regard this as a step too far. For one, 
focusing the discussion on the four indicators highlights the richness of the various 
facets of flexibility. In addition, the trade-offs between objectives and the interactions 
of the different dimensions are too dependent on specific views about the workings 
of the economy and on country-specific features. Aggregation would be too 
subjective and give a sense of false precision.

8 
We chose the two objectives at the heart of central bank functions. The real economy has been central 
to discussions of the merits of inflation targeting from the very beginning, as exemplified in the 
Taylor (1993) rule. Financial stability emerged around the early 2000s, linked to the possible build-up 
of financial imbalances (Borio and Lowe (2002); Cecchetti et al (2002)), and became more prominent 
in the debate following the Great Financial Crisis (eg Woodford (2012)). Objectives around eg climate 
and inequality have been discussed recently, but without affecting inflation targeting frameworks.

A couple of examples illustrate the point. Consider first the interaction between 
the numerical specification of the target and the horizon. How does overall flexibility 
change when the two move in opposite directions, eg the specification becomes 
tighter, but the horizon lengthens?9 This requires taking a view on the effect on 
inflation expectations, the credibility of the regime and the economy more generally. 
Similarly, the trade-offs between inflation, output and financial stability depend 
crucially on how low inflation interacts with the build-up of financial imbalances and 
on the impact of monetary policy over different horizons. Views can differ 
substantially on all of these issues (eg Borio (2024); Svensson (2014)) as well as on 
which country-specific features matter most. And yet taking a stand on these issues 
would be critical to set the weights of the four indicators in an overall index.

Aggregation, by contrast, is more straightforward at the level of the features of 
each sub-dimension (eg the formal status and degree of ambition for an objective). 
To be sure, here, too, a degree of judgment is required to assign weights (Box A). But 
the features are more similar and can be more easily compared.

The final, more practical, issue concerns the choice of central bank documents 
used as a basis for constructing the indicators. We draw exclusively on official 
documents that describe the features of the regime – objectives and strategy. 
Objectives, which are often couched in high-level terms (eg “price stability”), are 
typically set in law. The strategy, which operationalises the objective(s), is more 
detailed and is typically contained in documents such as specific agreements with the 
government,10 standalone statements (eg the Federal Reserve’s Statement on Long-
Term Objectives of Monetary Policy) and annual or inflation reports. We do not 
include speeches. While relevant, they often reflect individual policymakers’ views, 
whereas strategy statements embody a broader consensus.

9 
Over a certain range, tightening the numerical target while lengthening the horizon can, on balance, 
increase flexibility, by better anchoring expectations while simultaneously making the target more 
achievable. But, after a point, the same shift could de-anchor expectations and reduce flexibility.

This box explains the construction of core indicators for the four key sub-dimensions of flexibility (Graph 1, blue 
boxes). We first explain the scoring system for the (eight) features of inflation targeting frameworks (orange 
boxes). We then explain how they are combined to construct the core indicators. Annex C provides additional 
details about coding choices and data sources.

The explanation is organised around Table A1. The second column shows the four key sub-dimensions, ie 
the flexibility of (i) the numerical target and (ii) target horizon, and objectives for (iii) the real economy and 
(iv) financial stability. The third column shows the eight features that can be adjusted to increase flexibility 
relative to the no-flexibility benchmark. In this (theoretical) benchmark, the policymaker’s sole objective is to meet 
a point target for headline inflation over a specific (short) time horizon. The policymaker thus has few options in 
responding to policy trade-offs. For instance, if energy prices surge, policy rates must rise so that inflation gets 
back to target over the horizon. And the policymaker has no formal mandate to consider real economic costs to 
justify a more gradual response.

For each of the eight features of inflation targeting frameworks, we list the main specification options, rank 
these options by degree of flexibility and attribute a corresponding score (Table A1, final column). The least and 
most flexible options earn a value of 0 and 1, respectively. For options that fall in between, we generally give an 
intermediary score (eg 0.5 when there are three options, and 0.33 and 0.66 when there are four options).

To illustrate the approach, consider first the type of inflation target (A1.1). Following Ehrmann (2021), the 
three options are: a point target, a point target with a tolerance interval and a target range. A range provides 
more flexibility than a point because it allows for more inflation paths to fall within the target. Intervals also 
offer more flexibility than points because they imply greater tolerance for fluctuations in inflation, but they 
provide less flexibility than ranges because the point within the interval gives clearer guidance about the 
targeted inflation rate (Ehrmann (2021)). And if the central bank seeks to respect that guidance, this reduces 
flexibility. The next margin of adjustment is the width of the range or interval (A1.2). For simplicity, we consider 
three options: 1, 2 and more than 2 percentage points. The wider the range, the higher the flexibility and hence 
the score.

The next feature is the target price measure (A1.3). The less flexible option is a CPI target, since the central 
bank must account for changes in all items of the consumption basket. The more flexible option is to use a core 
inflation target (which excludes particularly volatile items eg food and energy) or “escape clauses”, ie a list of 
types of price changes that the central bank can ignore (eg administrative prices).

As regards the inflation target horizon (A2.1), we consider two options. When there is a numerical horizon, 
we assign a 0. In that case, the policymaker has less leeway to “look through” unwanted inflation outcomes to 
avoid abrupt changes in interest rates. For instance, the Bank of Israel aims to meet the target within two years. 
We give a 1 when the horizon is qualitative. For instance, the Central Bank of Norway says that it aims to achieve 
its target “in the medium term”. In most cases, numerical horizons are one or two years. Qualitative horizons 
are thus also typically longer.

Consider next objectives for the real economy and financial stability. For each objective, we first assess its 
formal status (B1.1 and B2.1). The highest-scoring option is when the objective is on par with price stability. This 
gives policymakers the strongest mandate to deviate from strict inflation targeting. The other options are for 
the objective to be secondary to price stability, or to be a simple consideration, ie an indication in the strategy 
statement that the objective can be taken into account, but without being grounded in law.

Second, we assess the objective’s degree of ambition. For the real economy, the score is lower when the 
goal is merely to dampen economic volatility, and higher when it is to reach full employment. For financial 
stability, we focus on the degree to which the central bank can act to prevent the build-up of financial 
imbalances – denoted as “lean against the wind” (LAW), for want of a better term. Since imbalances often 
develop in a phase of moderate inflation, such a scenario would generally imply a trade-off with price stability 
– unlike a scenario in which the economy is in freefall. We also consider whether the possibility to lean against 
the imbalances is qualified (less ambitious), such as through clauses stating “in exceptional circumstances” or 
that monetary policy is a “second line of defence” (relative to eg prudential policy).

To summarise the evolution of flexibility, we construct one core indicator for each sub-dimension in the second 
column of Table A1 (and blue boxes in Graph 1). How to best weigh different features requires judgment. For 
the numerical target, we use a simple average of the scores for the target type, width of range and price measure. 
For each objective, we give a 75% weight to the formal status, and 25% to the degree of ambition. This eg 
ensures that an objective gets an “uplift” if it is ambitiously worded, but without achieving a higher weight than 
having a formal status.

 Governance and accountability mechanisms help to shape credibility. We exclude them from our indicators as they are typically

covered in indices of central bank independence. For simplicity, we also ignore objectives for the exchange rate, which are relatively

rare and should be best regarded as intermediate targets. We also ignore changes to the level of inflation targets, since this does

not affect flexibility per se.  We give no score when there is no band or range. Otherwise, much of the variation in criterion A2.2

would reflect variation between frameworks with and without bands, similarly to criterion A1.1.  We give the highest score for

ambitions to minimise shortfalls from full employment (Federal Reserve). The Fed introduced this language following its 2020 strategy

review. It also specified that it aimed for inflation “that averages 2% over time”. We ignore this change because its implications are

ambiguous. On one hand, it reduces the flexibility associated with ignoring past inflation (“bygones”). On the other hand, it could be

seen to increase the flexibility to tolerate higher inflation for some time given initial conditions – an important goal of the strategy

and the only aspect explicitly mentioned in the statement (another element of asymmetry).  This eg means that the core indicator

for real economy objectives is similar if there is a vaguely worded primary objective for the real economy or an ambitiously worded

AEs and EMEs differ systematically in terms of the specification of the target. AE 
central banks are significantly stricter in terms of the numerical target. More than half 
of AEs have the strictest specification, ie a point target for headline inflation and no 
escape clauses (the euro area, Iceland, Japan, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Norway 
and the United States). All AEs gain flexibility through the horizon, which is defined 
only in qualitative terms. By contrast, EMEs rely on more flexible numerical targets 
(eg ranges) and are more likely to have specific, shorter-term horizons. This may 
reflect the greater importance of highly volatile inflation components in EMEs 
(eg commodity and food prices) that may create large but less persistent deviations 
from target at any given time. It may also stem from the greater challenges faced in 
retaining credibility over longer horizons given the history of extended periods of 
higher inflation.

Another striking difference is the weight of real economy considerations. This 
weight is around 40% higher for AEs. In part, this is because two thirds of AE central

banks have real economy formal objectives, against only one third of their EME peers. 
At one end of the spectrum, in Australia and the United States, these formal objectives 
have the same status as price stability and are specified in terms of maximum (or full) 
employment rather than more vaguely (eg supporting the government’s economic 
policy objectives). At the other end of the spectrum are several EMEs for which this 
objective does not figure at all (Czechia, Indonesia, Peru, the Philippines and 
Romania). One possible reason why AEs have broader real economy mandates is that 
this flexibility is seen as representing a smaller threat to the credibility of the target 
than in EMEs given the better inflation history.

By contrast, financial stability has a somewhat lower weight in AEs than in EMEs. 
One reason is that no AE central bank has a formal financial stability objective for 
monetary policy. Instead, AE central banks often simply have financial stability 
“clauses” in their strategy statement, around half of which refer to leaning against 
financial imbalances. In most cases, however, the clause includes significant caveats. 
This stands in sharp contrast to Korea, where monetary policy – not macroprudential 
policy – is explicitly stated as the first line of defence against such imbalances.11

The dispersion portrayed in Graph 2 shows that, across all facets of flexibility, AE 
frameworks tend to be more homogenous than those in EMEs. In particular, there is 
greater diversity across EMEs in terms of real economy and financial stability 
objectives and the flexibility of the target horizon. This coincides with EMEs being 
more diverse in terms of inflation histories.

Inflation targeting flexibility as of end-2024

Average scores across countries, 0 (least flexible)–1 (most flexible) 
Table 1

Advanced economies 
Emerging market economies

A. Flexibility of inflation target specification

A1.1 How flexible is the type of target? 
0.23 
0.53

A1.2 How wide is the range or tolerance band? 
0.38 
0.62

A1.3 How selective is the price index? 
0.00 
0.21

A2.1 How flexible is the target? 
1.00 
0.60

B. Objectives other than price stability

B1.1 What status does the objective have? 
0.61 
0.36

B1.2 What is the degree of ambition? 
0.45 
0.35

B2.1 What status does the objective have? 
0.24 
0.36

B2.2 What is the degree of ambition? 
0.32 
0.10

1 Simple average of features A1.1 to A1.3. 2 Weighted average of status (75%) and degree of ambition (25%).

Source: Authors’ calculations based on central bank or government reports and statements (see Box A and Annex C).

11 
The financial stability weights are highest in Korea and Indonesia. The Bank of Korea has a statutory 
financial stability objective, but no formal macro- or microprudential responsibilities.

Evolution of the flexibility of the frameworks

While the previous section describes the most recent snapshot, how did the flexibility 
of the frameworks evolve to reach the current state? In the big picture, three stylised 
facts stand out. First, the flexibility of numerical targets has declined while that of the 
horizons has increased. Second, flexibility has grown with respect to objectives other 
than price stability – real economy and financial stability. Third, these trends are 
typically starker in AEs.

Delving further into the timing and nature of the changes holds clues about the 
possible driving forces. The pattern is generally consistent with the idea that stronger 
confidence in hitting the inflation target and in the framework’s credibility, as 
reflected in stricter numerical targets and longer horizons, has provided more leeway 
to pursue other objectives and address trade-offs. In addition, the Great Financial 
Crisis (GFC) seems to have left a significant mark, at least in AEs, which bore the brunt 
of it. To illustrate these ideas, we inspect average indicator values over time (Graphs 3 
and 4). To take into account the possible impact of changes in the composition of the 
sample, we also consider overall changes in core indicators since inflation targeting 
was adopted (Graph 5) and over subperiods (Annex Graph A.1).12 Consider the 
specification of the target and objectives, in turn.

Growing confidence in the ability to control inflation and in the frameworks’ 
credibility, as reflected in benign outcomes, was probably the main factor shaping 
changes in the target specification until at least the GFC. In AEs, by 2008 core inflation 
targets and escape clauses had largely been dispensed with, and less well

Inflation target flexibility over time1 
Graph 3

A. Advanced economies 
 B. Emerging market economies

Flexibility score 
yoy, %
Flexibility score 
yoy, %

1 The flexibility score ranges from 0 (least flexible) to 1 (most flexible); the series begin when each group includes at least four central 
banks. 2 Ten-year moving average.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on central bank or government reports and statements (see Box A and Annex C).

12 
The composition of the sample changes over time as more jurisdictions adopt inflation targeting. By 
2005, around 90% of central banks in the sample had adopted inflation targeting. The graphs indicate 
that compositional effects are generally not significant.

specified / longer-term horizons had been established (Graphs 4.C and 4.D). 
Moreover, if ranges or intervals applied at all, they had mostly become quite narrow 
(+/–1%) (Graph 4.B).13 As a result, numerical targets had already lost significant 
flexibility pre-GFC. The picture is less stark in EMEs, where the decline in the level and 
volatility of inflation generally occurred later. On the eve of the GFC, several (but not 
all) EMEs had already done away with specific horizons (Graph 4.D), but looser target 
types (eg ranges) and selective price measures were still relatively common.

The post-GFC phase had a stronger impact on AEs, as policy frameworks adjusted 
with some delay to certain de facto changes in the conduct of policy. As central banks 
often struggled to push stubbornly low inflation back to target, the frameworks in 
AEs often sought to further emphasise a focal point for expectations. This is visible in 
the continuous fall in the flexibility of AE target types (Graph 4.A). Examples of this 
trend include dropping ranges (eg euro area) or tolerance intervals (eg Sweden) and 
adding midpoints (eg Australia). This is consistent with concerns about possible 
de-anchoring of expectations at a time of persistent shortfalls of inflation from target, 
including with the possibility of costly deflation.14 Better anchoring could be seen as 
yielding greater leeway to put weight on real economy, at least in the near term. By 
contrast, in EMEs, while some further adjustment did take place, it was more muted 
and took place from a considerably more flexible score. This is consistent with the 
countries not having been at the heart of the GFC, having less concern about inflation 
shortfalls and, in some cases, having greater concerns about the longer-term 
implications of very low interest rates for financial stability.

The influence of confidence in inflation targeting frameworks’ credibility and of 
the GFC is also visible in the growing weight of real economy considerations. As 
inflation performance improved, by the mid-2000s real economy concerns had 
already risen substantially (Graph 4.E). And the trend continued after the GFC. The set 
of central banks with formal real economy objectives (or assigning a higher standing 
to them) includes several AEs, such as Sweden (1997), the United Kingdom (1997), 
Switzerland (2004), New Zealand (2019) and Australia (2023), but also some EMEs – 
Thailand (2020) and Brazil (2021).15 Moreover, in AEs the degree of ambition also 
increased markedly, with a greater concerns about levels or rates of growth or 
employment (rather than just volatility), eg in Australia, Canada and the United States 
(Graph 4.F). This is less the case for EMEs.

The evolution of the weight of financial stability follows a broadly similar pattern 
to that of the real economy. In this case, however, the upward trend and apparent 
impact of the GFC is more muted overall. Formal financial stability objectives are 
relatively common in Asia (eg Indonesia, Korea, the Philippines and Thailand), but 
only Indonesia added it post-GFC. The weight on financial stability among Asian 
central banks may reflect the experience with the Asian financial crisis in the mid-
1990s. Some adjustments also included clauses explicitly mentioning the “leaning 
against financial imbalances” option (eg Thailand, joining Korea).

13 
The switch away from selective price measures might also have been relatively inconsequential, since 
in practice decision-making often puts significant weight on core inflation.

In AEs, no central bank in our sample took on a formal financial stability objective 
for monetary policy after the GFC. Instead, almost all AE central banks added financial 
stability “clauses” to their strategy statements. Pre-GFC, only Canada and Sweden had 
adopted such clauses (both in 2006), allowing for leaning against financial imbalances 
in both cases. In the mid-2010s, clauses spread to eg New Zealand, Norway and the 
United Kingdom. That said, such clauses lost bite as macroprudential instruments 
gained ground and became a key tool to fulfil central banks’ growing financial 
stability responsibilities. In Australia, while such a clause was added in 2016, it was 
removed in 2023 following the Reserve Bank of Australia review.16 Similarly, 
monetary policy in Iceland no longer has a financial stability mandate since 2022, 
perhaps reflecting in part the creation of a separate Financial Stability Committee two

years earlier. This ebbing of financial stability concerns is visible in a decline in AE 
financial stability scores in the last part of the sample (Graphs 4.G and 4.H).

Inflation targeting has become the favoured global monetary framework and has 
proved remarkably durable (Rose (2020)). This study has documented a less well 
known fact. Under the surface, such frameworks’ flexibility has evolved significantly. 
On the one hand, the explicit weight on objectives other than inflation – real economy 
objectives such as output and employment and, to a lesser extent, financial 
stability – has grown. On the other hand, the pursuit of those objectives has been 
facilitated through greater flexibility of the horizon over which the target is to be 
achieved even as the target itself has become less flexible. These developments, 
which are typically more marked among AEs, appear to reflect primarily a mix of 
considerations: greater confidence in the credibility of the frameworks; what, until 
recently, has been a benign inflation environment; and the impact of the GFC.

The adaptability of the inflation targeting framework has no doubt been one 
factor behind its durability. The changes have increased the regime’s acceptability. 
Given past experience, it will be especially interesting to see how the recent surprising 
surge in inflation will influence the next adjustments. Forthcoming reviews offer a 
valuable opportunity to further refine the framework.17

The analysis of this study has been purely positive, not normative. The objective 
has simply been to document the evolution of the flexibility of the framework, not to

assess the validity of the changes and their impact on the effectiveness of the 
regime.18 At the same time, the analysis can inform such an evaluation by providing 
a systematic cross-country treatment. With that goal in mind, the indicators 
underlying the study are being made available on the BIS website.

Whether and how changes to frameworks occur depends on the institutional context 
and the specific adjustment.

Objectives for monetary policy are often enshrined in law (or more rarely in 
constitution or treaty). Therefore, changing them is generally up to government or 
parliament. For the strategy (ie the operationalisation of the objectives), there are two 
main cases (first two rows of Table B.1). In the first group of jurisdictions, the central 
bank sets the strategy independently and can therefore take the initiative to make 
changes on its own. This was the case, for instance, of the recent changes to the 
strategies of the Federal Reserve (2020) and ECB (2021).

In the second group, the government is involved in setting key aspects of the 
strategy. Therefore, adjustments are initiated by the central bank alone or together 
with the government depending on the aspect in question. In Australia, Canada, 
Iceland and New Zealand, the government and central bank sign a joint agreement 
covering the numerical inflation target and other aspects (eg trade-offs between 
objectives). In the United Kingdom, the government sets the strategy independently. 
Among EMEs, when the government is involved, it typically focuses on setting the 
numerical inflation target (alone or jointly with the central bank).

Processes to set monetary policy strategy1 
Table B.1

Central bank sets strategy independently 
AEs 
5 
CH, EA, JP, SE, US

Government is involved in setting the inflation target (and 
potentially other aspects of the strategy)

Underlined codes indicate jurisdictions where objectives are enshrined in constitution or treaty. Central banks in red have changed to periodic 
reviews during the past five years. Sample: 26 central banks with inflation targeting or closely related frameworks.

1 This table only considers aspects of frameworks not set in law; this typically excludes objectives. 2 The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy
Committee’s remit is renewed by the government, generally near the annual budget announcement; in 2013, the renewal was exceptionally
backed by a full-fledged review.

The frequency and incidence of changes also differ. Since changing objectives 
requires a parliamentary process, this happens relatively infrequently on an ad hoc 
basis. The strategy can potentially change more frequently and regularly. Recently, 
the Reserve Bank of Australia, ECB, Reserve Bank of New Zealand and Federal Reserve 
have announced the intention to review their strategy every five years. This follows 
the Canadian practice since 1998.19 Other central banks have occasionally reviewed 
their strategy on an ad hoc basis (eg those of Chile, Japan, Norway, Switzerland and 
Thailand). Yet another case is for the government to set the inflation target on a

19 
Before then, the Reserve Bank of Australia and Reserve Bank of New Zealand renegotiations of the 
agreement typically coincided with new governments or Governor tenures.

regular basis – eg every year for Brazil, and every three years for Korea – typically 
without changing other aspects of the strategy.

The approach to conducting reviews also differs widely. In AEs, it has become 
commonplace for central banks and/or governments to conduct public framework 
reviews. These can cover a range of aspects, including objectives and/or the strategy. 
It is also frequent for reviews to be led by external experts, typically academics or ex-
central bankers, especially when the government commissions the review. In EMEs, 
public reviews led by experts are rare (Chile and Thailand are two exceptions). In most 
cases, target changes happen without reviews.

The data are collected manually from publicly available sources. Table C.1 lists the 
official sources used. Whenever available, we use the English language version of the 
source material. Central banks sometimes specify that English language material does 
not constitute official publications. In a handful of cases, we have used online tools 
to translate original language sources.

The codification of source material reflects the authors’ judgment only and is 
done on a best efforts basis. Some codification choices are worth highlighting, even 
if they concern only a handful of observations.

When source material is unavailable for a given jurisdiction and year (or for a 
specific framework feature), we assume that the latest available source remains valid.

In a few cases, the central bank has both a short-term and a medium-term 
inflation target. We consider only the former. In terms of escape clauses, we only 
consider instances when specific items are explicitly excluded from the price measure 
targeted, or when the statement explicitly says that the central bank does not respond 
to some specific shocks. We ignore cases when the strategy statement merely 
specifies that the central bank responds differently to some shocks, or that it expects 
inflation to deviate from target in the short term.

In a few cases, there is a discrepancy between the horizon for the inflation target 
set out in the strategy statement and the formal announcement of the target (typically 
made by the government alone or jointly with the central bank). In such cases we 
consider the information in the strategy statement.

For the target price measure, for simplicity we also consider that the central bank 
targets CPI inflation when it uses a measure that strips out the direct effect of changes 
in policy rates.

We do not consider that the central bank has an objective for the real economy 
or financial stability when its strategy statement merely specifies that price stability is 
a precondition or key factor for eg growth or financial stability (or the reverse). We 
do not consider as a financial stability objective instances of objectives for 
eg development of the financial system or the functioning of the payment system. 
Even when the statement mentions a financial stability objective, it is not always clear 
to what extent it applies to monetary policy, as opposed to being only an institution-
wide objective. In such cases, absent a clear indication that financial stability is 
relevant to monetary policy, we consider that the central bank has a consideration for 
financial stability rather than an objective.

In a few cases, the formulation of the central bank’s objective for the real 
economy or financial stability differs from the formulation in law. In these cases, we 
use the strategy statement, since it is typically timelier. In the few cases of objectives 
to support economic growth, we give the same score as for objectives to dampen 
economic volatility. When the objective is for full potential growth, we give the same 
score as objectives for full employment.

When there are more than two options for one framework feature, we set scores 
so that there is an equal increment between each option. One exception is for the 
ambition for the real economy (B1.2). The highest-scoring option for that feature is 
an objective to miminise shortfalls from full employment. The second highest ranking 
option is to achieve full employment. These two options would differ when 
employment is above estimated full employment, but not when it is below. Therefore,

we set the increment between these two options to half of the increment between 
the other options for that feature.

Some choices about the sample are also worth discussing. In general, a central 
bank is included in the sample from the year when it adopts inflation targeting. In a 
few cases, however, there are missing data for some years after adoption. For 
instance, the Reserve Bank of Australia considers that it adopted inflation targeting 
“in the early 1990s”. Until 1996, however, the inflation target was only set out in vague 
terms in the Governor’s speeches. Therefore, Australia only enters the data set in 
1996. The euro area counts as one observation. We include the ECB from 2003, when 
it clarified that it did not tolerate deflation.

Australia 
Early 1990s 
Statements on the Conduct of Monetary Policy (from 1996).

Brazil 
1999 
• 
From 2016: introduction to end-of-year Central Bank of Brazil Inflation Reports

• 
1999–2015: annual inflation target decrees, available on Central Bank of Brazil 
website

Canada 
1991 
Agreements on the Inflation-Control Target between Bank of Canada and the 
Minister of Finance

Chile 
1990 
• 
From 2020: ”Chile’s monetary policy within an inflation-targeting framework”

• 
2007–20: “La política monetaria del Banco Central de Chile en el marco de 
metas de inflación”

• 
2000–06: “Monetary policy of the Central Bank of Chile: objectives and 
transmission”

• 
1991–99: “La política monetaria en Chile”; “Una década de metas de inflación en 
Chile: desarollos, lecciones y desafios”

This article examines whether stricter public policies to curb greenhouse gas emissions have 
spurred the development of green bond markets and whether the issuance of green bonds has 
been associated with a subsequent reduction in emissions. The findings indicate that green bond 
markets have grown the most in countries with stricter emissions targets. Green bond issuance 
increased especially in sectors with heavy emissions that have been subject to sectoral mitigation 
policies. Moreover, even though green bonds lack binding constraints on emissions reduction, 
green bond issuance in those sectors has been followed by a significant reduction in emissions.

• 
Increased issuance of green bonds has followed stricter emissions policies aimed at reducing country-
level emissions.

• 
Issuing a green bond has become a good indicator of reduced corporate emissions, notably for firms in 
carbon-intensive sectors or those that had been heavy emitters.

against the backdrop of increasingly stringent environmental regulations and more 
transparent reporting of the impact of green bonds. Annual issuance reached 
$700 billion in 2024, a fraction of the estimated $2 trillion annual investment needed 
to tackle climate change (Ananthakrishnan et al (2023)).3 The rise of environmental, 
social and governance (ESG) investing in the asset management industry reflects the 
growing demand for sustainable instruments. Some investors, including those in the 
reserve management community, favour those green bonds where the environmental 
impact can be certified.4 On the supply side, green bond issuers have grown in 
number and now include a diverse group of sovereigns, municipalities, financial 
institutions and private corporations.

The article then empirically examines the relationship between climate 
abatement policies, green bond issuance and corporate GHG emissions. It does this 
by integrating firm-level data on emissions from S&P Trucost and issuance data from 
various financial databases.

In the second section, the article tackles two key empirical questions. The first is 
whether stricter regulatory frameworks have been effective in encouraging issuance 
of green bonds. The results suggest that regulatory stringency has a positive and 
statistically significant correlation with growth in the green bond market. In particular, 
policies that have targeted emissions in specific economic sectors have been followed 
by the largest increases in green bond issuance.

The second empirical question is whether the issuance of green bonds is 
followed by a future reduction in GHG emissions. Findings indicate that a firm’s 
emissions decrease, and its carbon efficiency improves, following initial issuance of a 
green bond. This suggests that green bond financing strategies broadly defined, 
rather than the amounts associated with any specific green bond issue, can serve as 
a signal of firms’ broader commitments to greening their operations. Further analysis 
reveals that this enhanced environmental performance is primarily achieved by firms 
in carbon-intensive sectors or those that were heavy emitters before issuing the green 
bond.

3 
Of course, green bonds are just one of many tools available to help corporations green their 
operations.

4 
The BIS’s own green bond funds, for example, were developed in part to support the adoption of 
best practices, including impact reporting, in the green bond market (BIS (2019)).

Green bonds, GHG emissions and environmental policies

The market for green bonds has evolved rapidly in recent years, alongside greater 
awareness of the economic costs of climate change. These bonds earmark proceeds 
for investment and other projects designed to mitigate the impact of economic 
activity on the environment, although generally without binding constraints (see 
Box A). This section presents stylised facts on the growth of green bond markets, the 
trajectory of GHG emissions and changes in climate-related public policies. Such 
policies have, until recently, incentivised emissions reduction primarily by 
corporations.

Since 2015 and the introduction of the International Capital Markets Association’s 
Green Bond Principles (ICMA (2021)), the market for green bonds has ballooned. 
Amounts outstanding neared $3 trillion in 2024, up from roughly $500 billion as 
recently as 2018 (Graph 1.A).5 While this is still small relative to corporate bond 
markets more broadly, green bonds are no longer a niche market. This growth has 
been underpinned by greater regulatory support across many jurisdictions and 
increased investor demand for green assets, reflecting growing awareness of the 
financial risks associated with climate change.

The exponential growth in the market is the result of greater issuance of green 
bonds in multiple jurisdictions. Advanced economies (AEs) have taken the lead, with

Green bond volumes have increased exponentially1

A. By country 
B. By currency 
C. By issuer sector

Official sector
Financial institutions
Non-financial corporations

1 Amount outstanding is calculated using total cumulative issuance minus cumulative amount matured as of a given year.

Sources: Climate Bonds Initiative; Dealogic; Environmental Finance Bond Database; S&P Trucost; authors’ calculations.

5 
There are currently no binding international reporting standards for green bonds (see Box A). The 
data on green bonds are compiled from issuance data from three different vendors. A bond is 
classified as green if at least one vendor identifies it as such. This yields a comprehensive sample of 
11,874 green bond issues in total by 3,352 different issuers from 2015–24.

member states from the euro area and the United States combined accounting for 
about half of the outstanding amounts (Graph 1.A). China stands out among 
emerging market economies (EMEs) with a significant market share as well. This 
geographic origin of issuers is reflected in the currency of outstanding green bonds. 
Bonds denominated in euros and US dollars are the most prevalent, but those in 
renminbi are also gaining ground (Graph 1.B).

Box A 
The evolution of green bond standards

A green bond is a fixed income security that raises capital for projects related to limiting climate change or 
otherwise benefiting the environment. It is intended to support sustainable development by financing initiatives 
that mitigate or offset the environmental impact of economic activities. These include renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, clean transportation, sustainable water management and biodiversity conservation. Issuers claim to 
use, and are expected to use, the proceeds from green bonds exclusively for these green projects. However, 
whether that is truly the case is controversial.

There are several types of green bond, each tailored to different financing needs and project structures. 
The most common type is the “use of proceeds” bond. Another type is the revenue bond, which ties repayment 
directly to the revenue generated by the green project itself. Municipalities, local governments, utility companies 
and transportation authorities are frequent issuers of such bonds. Similarly, project bonds focus on specific 
projects and are secured by the assets and balance sheet of that project alone. This type is often used for large 
infrastructure projects (eg wind farms) and often in the context of public-private partnerships. Securitised bonds 
rely on securitisation to finance environmentally sustainable projects. An example is a bond issue backed by a 
pool of green assets (eg loans for energy-efficient buildings). Financial institutions (including commercial and 
investment banks, securitisation firms and government agencies) issue securitised bonds, often via special 
purpose vehicles (SPVs) to ensure that the credit risk is confined to the SPV rather than the parent company. 
Additionally, government-sponsored enterprises may issue these bonds to support specific policy objectives, 
eg promoting home ownership or financing sustainable infrastructure.

Investors in green bonds whose purpose is to have an environmental impact want to ensure that funds are 
not diverted to other uses. Transparency and adherence to established standards are thus crucial for maintaining 
integrity in the green bond market (Ehlers and Packer (2017)). However, issuers may engage in “greenwashing”, 
ie marketing bonds as green without a commitment to environmental sustainability. Additionally, there is debate 
about whether green bonds finance projects that would not otherwise be funded. If such projects could be 
funded via conventional bonds, the additional benefit of green bonds may be limited. For any given issuer, the 
credit risk in a typical green bond (use of proceed bond) and a conventional bond is similar, since both are 
backed by the issuer’s entire balance sheet. While this provides a broad guarantee of repayment of green bonds, 
it also undermines the authenticity of any split between specific green projects and other activities of the issuer.

These challenges can, in principle, be addressed with transparent reporting of the use of proceeds from 
green bonds and the environmental impact of projects they finance. Green bond standards, like the Green Bond 
Principles set forth by the International Capital Markets Association and the Climate Bonds Standard established 
by the Climate Bonds Initiative, provide frameworks for what and how to disclose information to investors. 
However, adherence to these standards is voluntary. Similarly, third-party certifications and second-party 
opinions (SPOs) can enhance credibility, but they too are not mandatory. Issuers that adhere to the standards 
aim to improve the attractiveness of their bonds, but some forgo these verification practices.

The lack of binding standards with clear, enforceable criteria has led to variability in practices among issuers 
(Ehlers and Packer (2017)) and has made it challenging for investors to compare bonds and assess their true 
environmental impact (Ehlers et al (2020)). Transparency and third-party verification have become more 
common (Cheng et al (2024)). However, smaller companies still tend to avoid SPOs and certifications due to 
cost concerns. For the same reason, these firms tend to produce lower-quality impact reports. Firms in EMEs 
also tend to avoid SPOs and certifications, and their impact reports are often limited. Regardless of the country 
of origin, firms issuing green bonds in smaller amounts often find the cost and effort of obtaining SPOs and 
certifications and of producing comprehensive impact reports outweigh the perceived benefits, especially if the 
bonds are targeted at investors already familiar with the issuer.

Issuers that are active in the green bond market include sovereigns, 
municipalities, financial institutions and non-financial corporations (Graph 1.C). 
Issuance by financial and non-financial corporations, especially in sectors with high 
emissions, has been particularly strong in recent years. The growing footprint of 
sovereign issuers has contributed to improvements in the quality and transparency 
of reporting standards. Because the use of proceeds type of green bond contradicts 
the principle of widespread fungibility of fiscal revenues, sovereign issuers of green 
bonds developed impact reporting and third-party certification (see Box A). Cheng et 
al (2024) show that non-sovereign issuers adopted these more stringent standards 
on green bonds as well.

Both demand- and supply-side factors have spurred growth in the green bond 
market. On the demand side, investors have increasingly prioritised sustainable 
investments, or the appearance thereof, driven by a societal shift towards 
environmental consciousness. Institutional investors have placed greater importance 
on green bonds in their long-term investment horizon for a variety of reasons, 
including the broad eligibility and diversification benefits of these bonds. Some now 
have stricter ESG mandates, some want to hedge carbon risk, and others may simply 
want to appear “green” (Krahnen et al (2023); NGFS (2024)). Adding to this, some 
central banks have adopted sustainability as a fourth reserve management objective 
in addition to the traditional goals of safety, liquidity and return (see Fender et al 
(2019, 2020, 2022)). Green investment funds and sustainability-focused indices have 
emerged to meet this growing demand (Graph 2.A).

Notably, this strong demand may have conferred a cost benefit to issuers. The 
so-called “greenium” is a trading premium on green bonds over traditional (ie non-

Some characteristics of green financial instruments 
Graph 2

A. AUM in ESG funds1 
B. Sovereign green bond premium3 
C. Historical yields on green bonds4

green) bonds with otherwise identical characteristics (Graphs 2.B and 2.C). Empirical 
evidence on the size of the greenium has been mixed. But it could be linked to 
demand pressures at issuance that reflect the investor preferences discussed above. 
External review and certification may also play a role (Caramichael and Rapp (2024)). 
Investors’ preference for more environmentally responsible firms to support 
sustainable growth (preference channel) and their perception that more carbon-
intensive firms have higher probability for default (risk channel) can both contribute 
to explaining the greenium6 (Xia and Zulaica (2022)). Flammer (2021) also documents 
that the issuance of green bonds triggers an increase in the equity price of the issuer, 
which could mean that green-oriented investors take it as a signal that the issuer will 
become more profitable, less risky or more attractive to other investors.

On the supply side, stricter environmental regulations and sustainability policies 
may have encouraged green financing, a point assessed below. The integration of 
ESG criteria into corporate strategies has prompted issuance, notably in the European 
Union (Caramichael and Rapp (2024)). More frequent issuance by sovereigns has also 
spurred development of green bond markets in their jurisdictions and raised green 
bond standards (Cheng et al (2024)). Finally, issuers seek the potential cost 
advantages (ie greenium) associated with green bonds.

Overall, the sixfold increase in market size since 2018 notwithstanding, green 
bonds are no panacea for funding the global energy transition. Issuers may be 
tempted to greenwash, improving their communication on sustainability without 
necessarily reducing their GHG emissions. The use of proceeds type of green bonds 
opens the door to such outcomes (Ehlers and Packer (2017); Scatigna et al (2021); 
Krahnen et al (2023)). In many jurisdictions, asset managers may also seek the label 
of green bonds exclusively for marketing purposes. In others, changes in the political 
arena may stigmatise green bonds and thus discourage asset managers from holding 
them.

Since 2016, governments have generally tightened policies to mitigate GHG 
emissions, reflecting the growing urgency to address climate change (Graph 5.A). A 
major catalyst has been the Paris Agreement of December 2015, which prompted 
many jurisdictions to set more ambitious emissions reduction targets. These policy 
shifts have been complemented by enhanced reporting and transparency 
requirements for corporate emissions.

These 
general 
shifts 
towards more 
stringent 
environmental 
policies 
notwithstanding, considerable cross-country differences remain. Across all countries, 
those with a higher level of economic development, proxied here by the human 
development index, tend to have more stringent policies (Graph 5.B).

Does issuance of green bonds link climate change policies 
and GHG emissions?

This section explores two key empirical questions. First, are differences in the 
stringency of public policies to mitigate GHG emissions across countries reflected in 
differences in the development of national green bond markets? Second, do 
corporations reduce their GHG emissions after issuing green bonds?

Policy stringency and the rise of green bond markets

Stricter climate policies may incentivise firms to green their operations and thus spur 
growth in green bond markets. This section investigates this formally using 
regressions on a sample of 39 countries from 2011 to 2022 (see Annex A).

The results show a positive correlation between policy stringency and the size of 
countries’ green bond markets (Table 1). An increase in the aggregate policy 
stringency by one standard deviation is associated with around 2.4% higher annual 
issuance of green bonds (column 1). Not all types of policies have the same impact, 
however. Sectoral policies, ie those that apply to specific industrial sectors, appear to 
have a louder echo in green bond issuance (columns 2 and 3): a one standard 
deviation shift towards greater stringency is associated with nearly 3% more green 
bond issuance. This result remains consistent in alternative specifications, where the 
size of the green bond market is proxied by its share in total bond issuance (columns 
4 to 6).

The design features of green bonds can vary across sectors, affecting the 
relationship between green bond issuance and policy stringency. Table 2 thus repeats 
the above regressions using issuance amounts in the financial sector (columns 1 to 3), 
non-financial sector (columns 4 to 6) and official sector (columns 7 to 9), respectively. 
For all three sectors, international policies such as participation in key international 
climate initiatives appear to coincide with greater issuance of green bonds. However, 
the story is different for cross-sectoral and sectoral policies. Cross-sectoral policies

One possible reason for these sectoral differences is that cross-sectoral policies 
involve actions implemented at the regional or national level. Examples include 
setting GHG emissions targets (eg nationally determined contributions, a key element 
of the Paris Agreement) or public research and development expenditures. Regional 
or national policies may prompt the official sector to issue green bonds to finance

related projects. By contrast, sectoral policies tend to target specific sectors such as 
electricity, industry, transport and construction, making them more relevant for 
corporate issuance.

The second important question is whether green bond issuance is also correlated 
with firms’ actual GHG emissions. On this question, the results in the literature to date 
have been mixed (Ehlers et al (2020); Flammer (2020, 2021); Fatica and Panzica (2021)), 
potentially due to different data sources. With the surge in green bond issuance and 
improvements in emissions reporting in recent years, this section revisits this question 
using a data sample with more than double the outstanding amount of green bonds 
available previously.10 This sample complements that in Cortina et al (2025), who 
focus on non-financial corporations and consider green bonds and green syndicated 
loans together.11

As a prelude to the regression analysis, Graph 6 presents a high-level view of 
how green bond issuance interacts with firms’ GHG emissions. Between 2016 and 
2022, firm-level GHG emissions experienced humped-shaped growth regardless of 
whether the firm issued green bonds (Graph 6.A), reflecting at least in part the 
reduction of activity due to Covid-related lockdowns in 2020 and 2021. However, for 
firms that did issue green bonds, their increase in emissions between 2015 and 2019

Green bond issuance also appears to be associated with a downward trajectory 
in firms’ emissions (Graph 6.B). This can be seen in the drop in GHG emissions starting 
in the year of an initial issuance. In aggregate terms, the emissions of green bond 
issuers fell by more than 10% in the four years following issuance (black line). The 
profile of the carbon efficiency of these firms’ operations suggests that this reflects 
changes in business practices beyond those stemming from pandemic-related 
lockdowns. Specifically, emissions per unit of firm revenue – a measure of emissions 
intensity (blue line) – shows an even starker drop following a green bond issuance. 
This metric dropped by nearly 30%, a faster pace than the one observed across the 
entire population of listed firms over the last decade (Jondeau et al (2021)).

Of course, green bond issuance alone may not explain these emissions 
trajectories. The green bond amounts seem to be small relative to the size of issuer 
firms (Flammer (2021)), and the impact they may have on the issuers’ overall business 
model may be limited (Lam and Wurgler (2024)). In addition to any direct impact of 
climate-friendly projects financed by green bonds, the drop in emissions may also 
stem from firms’ broader commitments to reduce emissions and green their 
operations. Green bonds may thus merely be a signal of such broader initiatives.

14 
These results are consistent with Cortina et al (2025) but differ from those of Guesmi et al (2025), 
whose estimates are based on a much smaller sample of green bonds compared with the sample in 
this article. Guesmi et al (2025) find that firms with high exposure to climate risks issue more green 
bonds.

Finally, Table 3 also reveals that it is the heavy emitters that reduce their GHG 
emissions after issuing green bonds. Given the skewness of carbon emissions, this is 
critical in terms of societal “net zero” objectives. While firms in the carbon-intensive 
sectors achieve significantly lower emissions intensity, firms in other sectors do not 
(columns 3 and 4). Splitting the sample by emissions intensity before a firm’s first 
green bond issuance shows consistent results (columns 5 and 6): firms in the highest 
emissions intensity quintile group reduce their emissions significantly, while those in 
the lowest intensity quintile group do not. Taken together, the results suggest that 
green bond issuance appears to signal deliberate changes in GHG emissions from 
sectors and by players that are the most relevant for aggregate GHG trajectories.

The rapid growth of the green bond market since the 2015 Paris Agreement 
highlights the increasing importance of green financial products in addressing 
climate change. The issuance of green bonds has proven to be a significant 
mechanism for channelling capital towards environmentally sustainable projects. The 
market now attracts a diverse array of issuers, including sovereigns, municipalities, 
financial institutions and, particularly, private corporations.

The empirical analysis presented above shows that green bond issuance has 
expanded the most in jurisdictions that have adopted stricter decarbonisation policies. 
Moreover, issuance has been followed by a fall in carbon emissions at the firm level.

These results combined indicate that green bonds have emerged as a reliable signal 
of firms’ overall commitment to improve environmental performance, at least in terms of 
GHG emissions. This seems to be the case particularly for heavy carbon emitters. By 
bridging the gap between environmental goals and financial markets, green bonds 
appear to contribute, perhaps only modestly considering their scale, to the global 
strategy to combat climate change.

Looking forward, issuers and promoters of green bonds should consider whether 
explicit binding constraints on GHG emissions at the issuer level could attract more 
demand for green bonds and thereby lower the funding costs of investments in more 
sustainable economic activities.

We study the joint evolution of financial strain at banks and investment funds. When market 
pressure on banks intensifies from an elevated level, net flows decline at open-ended corporate 
bond mutual funds (MFs), corporate bond exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and prime money market 
funds alike. This commonality has risen materially over time for all three fund types. That said, 
bond ETFs can be a stabilising force, as salient features of their business model help attract 
investor inflows in times of stress. By contrast, outflows from bond MFs tend to contribute to a 
tightening of market conditions when banks are already under pressure.

We study a specific channel through which bank-NBFI interdependence may 
affect financial stability. In particular, we seek to shed light on whether strain at 
investment funds tends to contribute to a tightening of market conditions when 
market pressure on banks intensifies from an already elevated level. Such joint 
dynamics would have adverse system-wide effects.

• 
When elevated market pressure in the banking sector intensifies, net flows decline at several investment 
fund sectors engaging in liquidity transformation. This relationship has strengthened greatly over time.

• 
In episodes of high market pressure on banks, exchange traded funds specialising in corporate bonds 
can be a stabilising force, as their business model helps attract investor inflows.

• 
By contrast, investor outflows from open-ended corporate bond mutual funds may contribute to a 
tightening of market conditions when banks are already under high pressure.

these investment fund sectors comprises homogeneous entities, which allows us to 
conduct the analysis at the fund-type level. In addition, because of liquidity 
transformation, the funds are vulnerable to investor flows that force fire sales. Such 
fire sales can be triggered by a common investor base in the fund and banking sectors 
and can influence the market conditions in which banks operate.

The focus of our analysis is inspired by, but distinct from, the standard one in the 
literature on systemic risk. In the spirit of the so-called SRISK measure (Acharya et al 
(2017), Brownlees and Engle (2017)), our main interest is in episodes of high market 
pressure in the banking sector. We stand apart, however, by not exclusively focusing 
on extreme stress. The high-pressure episodes in this article also include more benign 
spells that only hold the potential to affect financial stability. It is during such episodes 
that liquidity management tools or structural disincentives to investor outflows would 
make a big difference. Furthermore, whereas the broad-based stress in a financial 
crisis makes financial intermediaries look alike, the episodes we consider are more 
likely to reveal any structural heterogeneity across NBFI types.

When market pressure on banks intensifies from a high level, we find the 
following about investment funds. First, net flows decline at bond MFs, bond ETFs 
and prime MMFs alike. This commonality with banks has strengthened materially over 
time. Second, despite their decline, net flows at bond ETFs remain in inflow territory, 
probably reflecting salient features of these funds’ business model that attract 
investors at times of stress. Third, by contrast, the bond MF sector faces material 
investor outflows, similar in magnitude to those experienced during the initial phase 
of the Covid-19 pandemic. A key driver of this finding is the behaviour of bond MFs 
that face outflows with initially low cash buffers – such funds respond by hoarding 
cash. Since cash hoarding is the flip side of illiquid asset sales, bond MFs tend to 
tighten market conditions at an unfavourable time for banks.

This article proceeds as follows. The first section discusses the growth of the three 
investment fund sectors and their interdependence with banks. The second describes 
our empirical approach. The third studies the joint evolution of fund flows and market 
pressure in the banking sector. The fourth section and an accompanying box analyse 
the economic significance of this evolution. The final section concludes.

The past 20 years have witnessed strong growth of NBFIs and of investment funds in 
particular. While the banking sector grew threefold from 2002 to 2023, reaching $189 
trillion in total assets, NBFIs roughly quadrupled over the same period, reaching $239

trillion in assets (FSB (2024)). Among NBFIs, bond and money market funds – 
including the corporate bond ETFs, open-ended corporate bond MFs and prime 
MMFs that this article focuses on – grew nearly fivefold as a group, from $11 trillion 
to $52 trillion.2 They are currently by far the largest component of NBFIs involved in 
bank-like activities.

NBFIs and banks – direct and indirect links

As NBFIs grew, they became increasingly intertwined with banks. This is a key 
conclusion of Acharya et al (2024), who gauge the contribution of banks and NBFIs 
to systemic risk by studying the evolution of their stock returns in times of extreme 
stress. The increased interdependence has an international dimension, as cross-
border links between banks and NBFIs – notably investment funds – rose by more 
than 60% between 2015 and 2020 (Aldasoro et al (2020), FSB (2024)).

Some of the links between the three investment fund types we study and banks 
relate to debt funding. MMFs hold bank commercial paper and certificates of deposit, 
and ETFs and MFs invest in bonds issued by banks. Focusing on European entities, 
Franceschi et al (2023) find that MMFs hold about 40% of bank debt with maturities 
shorter than six months, whereas MFs account for 10% of such debt with maturities 
longer than three years. In the United States, MMFs are a key source of dollar funding 
for non-US banks (Aldasoro et al (2020), Aldasoro, Balke, Barth and Eren (2022)).3 The 
funding links also go in the other direction. Banks provide investment funds – as well 
as other NBFIs – with short-term loans and credit lines. And in times of stress, funds 
rely on repo borrowing from banks (Bank of England (2024)).

Other links stem from shared ownership, market making activity and common 
asset exposures. For one, fund managers rely on support from banks belonging to 
the same holding company (Bagattini et al (2023)). In addition, prime MMFs typically 
interact with one bank dealer and rely on this dealer if they need to sell any of their 
illiquid assets (Novick et al (2020), FSB (2021)). Furthermore, corporate bond ETFs, 
corporate bond MFs and prime MMFs trade and invest in similar assets as banks. 
Consistent with these funds’ capacity to influence conditions in markets where banks 
operate, Cetorelli et al (2023) find that bond funds play the largest role among NBFIs 
in the propagation of price shocks that ultimately hit bank capital.

A common investor base can create important indirect links between banks and 
funds. For instance, US data reveal that the “real” sector – which includes households 
and non-financial businesses – held approximately 60% of banks’ liabilities as well as 
between 60 and 80% of MFs’ and MMFs’ shares in 2023.4 A retrenchment by these 
investors from both banks and investment funds would have systemic consequences. 
Relatedly, Acharya and Rajan (2024) highlight that, while the large post-Great 
Financial Crisis (GFC) expansion in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheets generated

2 
There is no official estimate of the global size of these three fund sectors. That said, available data 
suggest that their US segments accounted for about 20% of the size of US NBFIs with bank-like 
activities (the FSB’s “narrow measure”) in 2023 (FSB (2024), Kuong et al (2024)).

3 
From banks’ perspective, the importance of this link with prime MMFs has decreased since the 2016 
US MMF reform. This reform led to mass conversions from the prime to the non-prime category 
(Aldasoro, Ehlers and Eren (2022)). Non-prime funds invest in short-term government securities or 
repos backed by such securities while prime funds can also hold commercial paper of both non-
financial and financial entities (including banks) and certificates of deposit.

4 
Less comprehensive data indicate that pension funds and insurance companies are also part of banks’ 
and funds’ common investor base.

flighty claims on commercial banks, these claims did not decline with the subsequent 
balance sheet contraction. Flush with liquidity, the holders of these claims are also 
likely to seek exposure to investment funds for a yield pickup.

Investors’ behaviour in times of stress – differences across fund types

When investment flows force funds to sell illiquid assets, they contribute to a 
tightening of market conditions. The systemic effects of such fire sales are stronger if 
they coincide with elevated market pressure elsewhere in the financial system.

The potential for disruptive fire sales in a risk-off environment is a feature of the 
fund types we study because they all engage in pronounced liquidity transformation.5 
Prime MMFs promise same day liquidity to their investors, and redemptions at bond 
MFs and ETFs are typically executed one day after investors request them. At the same 
time, the assets in these funds’ portfolios trade in illiquid secondary markets.

That said, there are important differences across these fund types. The exposures 
of prime MMFs are of shorter maturity and typically to higher-quality borrowers than 
those of bond MFs or bond ETFs. Thus, prime MMFs may actually benefit from a flight 
to liquidity when investors’ risk appetite declines. Of course, in systemic events such 
as the GFC and the pandemic-related crisis – when investors sought refuge in 
government MMFs – the prime MMF sector may be at the epicentre of the stress.

In turn, the business model of bond ETFs is less prone to destabilising dynamics. 
Authorised participants (APs) – the only entities that can create or redeem ETF shares 
in primary markets – and bargain hunting end investors step in to put a lid on 
discrepancies between the share price of the actively traded bond ETFs and the value 
of the underlying illiquid portfolio (Aquilina et al (2023), Aramonte and Avalos (2020), 
Gorbatikov and Sikorskaya (2022)). Such stabilising behaviour is viable because of 
bond ETF design features that reduce the risk of runs. For one, because there is a 
small number of APs in each ETF, they take into account the adverse price impact that 
redemptions would have on their holdings. Furthermore – in contrast to MFs – it is 
standard practice to redeem bond ETF shares in exchange for securities, rather than 
cash. This in-kind redemption allows ETF sponsors to strategically choose the 
composition of “redemption baskets” in stress, so that the attractiveness of 
redemptions declines (Todorov (2021), Shim and Todorov (2021)). All this mitigates 
the likelihood that – in a risk-off environment – outflows from bond ETFs would 
necessitate fire sales.

We now describe our empirical approach to studying the joint evolution of strain in 
the banking and investment fund sectors. In the first subsection, we describe how we 
identify episodes of high market pressure on banks. In the second subsection, we 
explain how we measure sector-level strain within such an episode.

5 
This is only one of the main propagation channels involving NBFIs. Another channel stems from 
fluctuations in leverage due to changes in margin requirements (Aramonte et al (2023)).

We use CDS spreads to differentiate between low and high market pressure in the 
banking sector. These spreads capture the premium that creditors demand for their 
exposure to an entity. Accordingly, they have been used as indicators of banking 
sector stress (Avino et al (2019), Knaup and Wagner (2012), Indergand et al (2022)).6

We define high market pressure in the banking sector as sustained increases in 
CDS spreads relative to a threshold. Specifically, we work with almost 20 years of 
monthly data with global coverage: 53 large banks from 15 jurisdictions. We study 
two subperiods – from January 2006 to December 2013 and from January 2014 to 
August 2024. Within each subperiod, “high-pressure” episodes include months that 
witness the top 10% of four-month changes in the median CDS spread (Graph 1, 
shaded areas).7 The remaining months are “low pressure”.

We chose the two subperiods and the definition of high market pressure for a 
number of reasons. First, the earlier subperiod roughly coincides with strong growth 
in the overall NBFI sector, whereas the size of this sector is stable at a high level during 
the later subperiod (FSB (2024)). Second, the high-pressure episodes capture well 
known systemic events, such as the GFC (2008–09), part of the European sovereign 
debt crisis (2010–12) and the initial fallout of the Covid-19 shock (2020). Third, the 
number and length of high-pressure episodes are roughly the same in the two 
subperiods. Fourth, by featuring only sustained increases in CDS spreads, high-
pressure episodes indicate increases in banks’ funding costs. By contrast, if CDS 
spreads spike abruptly and then quickly revert to low levels, banks would be able to 
reduce the attendant impact on their funding expenses by slightly delaying some of

High vs low market pressure episodes in the banking sector

2024
2023
2022
2021
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006

The shaded areas indicate high market pressure episodes, including all observations for which the change in CDS spread from month t–4 to 
t is above the 90th percentile within each of the two subperiods delineated by the dashed line at end-2013.

Sources: S&P Global Market Intelligence; authors’ calculations.

6 
Since identifying causality is out of scope, we will not try to establish whether the evolution of CDS 
spreads is due to issues in the banking sector itself, originates in another sector or is the outcome of 
a market-wide risk-off environment.

7 
If a gap between such months is up to two-months long, we also treat it as high pressure.

their new debt issuance. This is why, for instance, the severe but very short-lived 
banking stress in March–April 2023 is not among the high-pressure episodes.

Ultimately, the high-pressure episodes in Graph 1 are not confined to systemic 
events. Such events affect a critical mass of financial entities and have macroeconomic 
repercussions – they are thus “deep in the tail”. In addition, we include episodes of 
banking sector fragility that could have evolved into a crisis but did not.8 The latter 
episodes could be a result of banks succeeding in overcoming their difficulties and 
reassuring markets, the public sector coming to the rescue (implicitly or explicitly) or 
NBFIs acting in a way that mitigates the pressure on banks. Below, we shed light on 
the relevance of the latter explanation for specific fund types.

When we condition on low or high market pressure episodes in the banking sector 
(per Graph 1), we track the evolution of strain in this sector as well as that in the three 
investment fund types. We say that strain in the banking sector increases when the 
median CDS spread rises month to month – that is, when market pressure in the 
banking sector intensifies (from either low or high levels). In turn, strain in a fund 
sector increases when there is a decline in net investor flows – defined as inflows 
minus outflows. We focus on sector-level strain, ie the aggregate net flow across all 
constituent entities over a month, divided by aggregate AUM at the beginning of the 
same month.

We work with monthly data on open-ended bond MFs, bond ETFs and prime 
MMFs from January 2006 to August 2024.9 Seeking to include a representative set of 
entities that hold global asset portfolios, we draw from the top 500 funds worldwide 
by AUM within each of the first two sectors. In a slight departure from this principle, 
we draw only from the top 500 US-domiciled prime MMFs, as the identification of 
similar MMFs domiciled elsewhere is not clear-cut. Our sample covers about 50% of 
bond MFs’, 70% of bond ETFs’ and nearly two thirds of US-domiciled MMFs’ total 
AUM as of December 2005. The findings below are robust to separately studying 
funds domiciled in specific jurisdictions.

We first measure the commonality of strain at investment funds and banks. Then we 
look into whether net fund inflows or outflows underpin this commonality.

8 
The increase in CDS spreads in early-2016 was likely driven by the near failure of a global systemically 
important bank (G-SIB). In turn, 2022 witnessed bouts of investor concern about credit risk in general 
and the CDS spreads of another G-SIB came under intense upward pressure.

9 
Working with monthly data prevents us from detecting outsize investor swings that reverse within a 
calendar month. However, it avoids the noise in higher frequency data. Conducting the analysis with 
weekly data confirms our findings in qualitative terms but lowers their statistical significance.

Commonality of strain at investment funds and banks

Strain commonality with the banking sector evolved similarly across investment fund 
sectors, increasing materially from the earlier to the later subperiod only within 
episodes of high market pressure.10,11 We see this by comparing bars of the same 
colour across the panels in Graph 2, where we calculate the correlation between CDS 
spread changes and the negative of net fund flows – thus, a higher correlation implies 
stronger commonality. While the correlations were below 30% (and statistically 
insignificant) in high-pressure episodes during the earlier subperiod, they rose to 
above 50% (and became statistically significant) in the later subperiod. By contrast, 
the corresponding correlations in low-pressure episodes barely moved (blue bars). 
The phenomenon is starkest in the bond MF sector, in which the low-pressure 
correlation declined slightly but the high-pressure correlation shot up from effectively 
zero to about 80%.

The correlations in the later subperiod (Graph 2.B) are consistent with investors 
perceiving that the similarity between bank and fund sectors rises in high-pressure 
episodes. When market pressure is low, a common investor base would exploit

Commonality of strain across banking and investment fund sectors1

Correlation coefficients between bank CDS spread changes and the negative of net fund flows 
Graph 2

1 Episodes of low/high market pressure, as identified in Graph 1. ***/** indicates statistical significance at the 1/5% level. The change in high-
pressure (low-pressure) correlations between the two subperiods is statistically significant at the 1% level (insignificant). See endnotes for 
details.

Sources: iMoneyNet; Lipper; S&P Global Market Intelligence; authors’ calculations.

10 
Loretan and English (2000) and Forbes and Rigobon (2002) warn that an increase in the correlation 
between two variables can be the “mechanical” outcome of higher volatility. The volatility of flows in 
the bond MF and prime MMF sectors did increase from the earlier to the later subperiod in our 
sample but that of flows in the bond ETF sector and of monthly changes in bank CDS spreads 
declined. In the Annex A, we illustrate that the link between volatilities and correlations can be driven 
by fundamentally different but observationally indistinguishable mechanisms. Since we are agnostic 
about the drivers of correlation changes, either mechanism could be behind our findings.

11 
This echoes a finding in Acharya et al (2024) on commonalities between the banking and the broad 
NBFI sectors. Using stock price data, they find that: (i) the systemic risk contributions of these two 
sectors have become more correlated since the GFC; and (ii) returns in each of the sectors cause – in 
a statistical sense – returns in the other.

diversification benefits by rebalancing its positions across sectors. In such episodes, 
there is thus a relatively high likelihood that, for example, an increase in banks’ CDS 
spreads would occur together with fund inflows. By contrast, common risk factors 
come to the fore in episodes of high market pressure in the banking sector. In such 
circumstances, investors both demand higher compensation for credit exposure to 
banks and retrench from investment funds.

For market conditions, it is crucial whether the above correlations reflect the 
evolution of inflows or outflows. While inflows would not force fire sales of fund 
assets, outflows may have the opposite effect. For this reason, we next consider the 
level of investor net flows in episodes of low and high market pressure.

The distribution of net investor flows remains largely similar between the two 
subperiods but differs markedly across sectors (Graph 3).

The picture is rather benign for bond ETFs and prime MMFs. In each subperiod, 
bond ETFs tend to face higher net flows – mostly inflows – when banks are under 
strong market pressure (Graph 3, red vs blue bars). This finding squares with 
contrarian behaviour by bond ETF investors, supported by these funds’ business 
models (as noted above). The experience of prime MMFs is similar, especially over 
the later subperiod, probably as a result of the relative safety of these funds’ 
portfolios.

The picture is much less benign in the case of bond MFs. Here, higher market 
pressure on the banking system tends to go together with lower net flows. While 
inflows and outflows are roughly equally likely in low-pressure episodes, outflows 
occur 75% of the time in high-pressure episodes. Again, this pattern persisted 
through both subperiods, consistent with strong incentives for a run to occur on bond

Strain distribution across investment fund sectors1

Monthly net flows, as a percentage of assets under management 
Graph 3

1 Episodes of low/high market pressure, as identified in Graph 1.

Sources: iMoneyNet; Lipper; S&P Global Market Intelligence; authors’ calculations.

MFs in a risk-off episode, as they hold riskier assets than prime MMFs and engage in 
greater liquidity transformation than bond ETFs.

The heterogeneity of flow distributions across fund types (Graph 3) helps refine 
the interpretation of the correlation results (Graph 2). In high-pressure episodes in 
the later subperiod, for instance, an intensification of market pressure in the banking 
sector tends to go together with declining inflows to bond ETFs and prime MMFs but 
with rising outflows from bond MFs (Graphs 2.B and 3.B, red bars).

Economic significance of bank-fund commonality

We now study the magnitude by which net fund flows evolve when pressure in the 
banking sector intensifies. Focusing on one fund sector at a time, we verify whether 
this relationship differs between episodes of low and high market pressure. In 
addition, further narrowing our focus to high-pressure episodes, we assess whether 
asset fire sales are likely to result from net fund flows that tend to go hand in hand 
with a standard adverse shock to bank CDS spreads. The latter sheds light on the 
economic significance of bank-fund commonality.

We proceed as follows, focusing on the later subperiod, as it reflects structural 
features of the financial system that are currently in place. We first estimate the 
relationship between (de-meaned) changes in the median CDS spreads in the 
banking sector and net fund flow (NFF) relative to AUM in an investment fund 
sector.12 We do so separately for low- and high-pressure episodes:

where k stands for bond ETFs, open-ended bond MFs or prime MMFs. Second, 
focusing on high-pressure episodes, we simulate a “shocked” net flow for each sector 
by replacing 𝛥𝐶𝐷𝑆௧:௧ିଵ

௞ to zero.13 As a 
benchmark for the shocked net flow in fund sector k, we use the maximum net 
outflow from this sector during the initial three months of the Covid-19 pandemic. 
These outflows were particularly disruptive, forcing central banks to intervene in order 
to restore orderly market functioning (Avdjiev et al (2020), Schrimpf et al (2020)).

௕௔௡௞ with its standard deviation and setting 𝜀௧

The regression estimates (Graph 4.A) add to the information about strain 
commonality that episode-dependent correlations revealed above (Graph 2.B). 
Consistent with the earlier findings, a higher rise in bank CDS spreads goes hand in 
hand with a lower net flow at each investment fund sector. However, only for bond 
MFs is this relationship materially stronger (with marginal statistical significance) in 
episodes of high pressure than in low-pressure episodes (Graph 4.A, blue vs red bars). 
Within high-pressure episodes, it is statistically significant only for bond ETFs and 
bond MFs. We thus focus on these two sectors in the rest of the section.

12 
By de-meaning the right-hand side variable, we set the intercept equal to the average NFF.

13 
Since we condition on high market pressure episodes, this typical shock is in the “tail”.

1 Based on regressing monthly net fund flows (NFFs) in a fund sector on (de-meaned) changes of bank CDS spreads, conditional on an 
episode category from January 2014 to August 2024. 2 *** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level. The estimates are scaled by the 
unconditional standard deviation of the NFF in the respective fund sector between January 2014 and August 2024. 3 Maximum NFF during 
the initial month of the Covid-19 pandemic (ie March 2020). 4 Associated with an adverse one standard deviation shock of banking sector 
strain, per equation (1).

We again find a benign picture for bond ETFs. Echoing earlier results, when the 
market pressure on the banking sector intensifies from a high level by a typical 
increment, net flows at bond ETFs decline but remain in inflow territory (Graph 4.B, 
first orange bar). Since such an outcome would lead these funds to purchase assets, 
it would contribute to a normalisation of market conditions.

In the case of bond MFs, the shocked net flows are outflows and of high economic 
significance. The ratio of these outflows to the maximum ones during the pandemic-
related crisis is at nearly one half (Graph 4.B, second orange bar relative to green bar). 
Such a large magnitude of shocked outflows suggests that it is likely to contribute to 
a tightening of market conditions by necessitating sales of illiquid assets.

Additional analysis, exploiting heterogeneity across individual funds, provides 
further evidence that the outflows from bond MFs in high-pressure episodes can be 
expected to generate material sales of illiquid assets. In Box A, we differentiate funds 
according to the share of highly liquid assets in their investment portfolio, while also 
accounting for the riskiness of this portfolio. We find that, when market pressure on 
banks intensifies from a high level, sector-level outflows are driven by funds with 
relatively low liquidity buffers. Focusing on the bond MF sector – and in line with 
Morris et al (2017) – we also find that low-liquidity funds are more likely to increase 
their cash buffers in the face of outflows. Since cash hoarding is the flip side of illiquid 
asset sales, such fund behaviour would tighten market conditions at an unfavourable 
time for banks.

Previous studies have found that investment funds can mitigate redemption risk by building liquidity buffers. 
In this box, we add to this evidence by studying net flows at individual funds in three sectors – open-ended 
corporate bond mutual funds (MFs), corporate bond exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and US prime money market 
funds (MMFs). We find that at times of high market pressure in the banking sector, funds with low liquidity 
buffers tend to experience stronger outflows and hoard cash.

Our empirical setup incorporates monthly data from January 2014 to August 2024. Within this period, we 
focus on months of high market pressure, ie those witnessing the top 10% of four-month changes in the median 
credit default swap (CDS) spread across 53 large banks. We draw our sample from the top 500 funds in each 
sector, working with those for which there are data on cash holdings (bond MFs and bond ETFs) or the holdings 
of (liquid) assets maturing within a week (prime MMFs). For each sector, a dummy variable “liquidity,” indicates 
which funds are in the top quartile with respect to the average ratio of cash or liquid assets to total assets under 
management (AUM). Then, denoting by NFF the ratio of net fund lows relative to AUM, and by 𝛥𝐶𝐷𝑆௧:௧ିଵ

௕௔௡௞ the 
one-month change in the median CDS spread in the banking sector, we estimate the following regression 
equation:

Here, i denotes funds, k a fund sector, t time and riskiness a control variable that is equal to the share of fixed 
income securities with a rating below investment grade in the total AUM.

*** indicates statistical significance of the associated coefficient at the 1% level.

1 Total estimated effect, per equation (A1). The dependent variables correspond to the entity-level strain (ELS) measures for each sector and
are winsorised at the 1st and 99th percentiles. ΔCDSt:t–1 is the one-month change in the CDS spreads for the median bank; for bond ETFs and
MFs, liquidity corresponds to a dummy variable taking the value 1 for funds for which the average percentage allocation to cash over the 
post-2014 subperiod is in the top quartile of the respective distribution; for prime MMFs, the dummy variable is based on the percentage of
assets maturing within one week. For bond ETFs and MFs, riskiness is the percentage of the fixed income allocation invested in securities with 
ratings below BBB; this measure is not available for prime MMFs. 2 Binned scatter plot. AUM = assets under management. Based on 
episodes of high market pressure in the 2014–24 subperiod (see Graph 1). Each dot of the binned scatter plot corresponds to the cash
holdings of fund i at the beginning of an episode of high market pressure (x-axis) vs the change in cash holdings for the same fund i from 
the last to the first period of the same episode of high market pressure.

We find that, all else equal, funds come under greater strain when their liquidity position is weaker (Graph 
A1.A). In the bond MF sector, the average net flow – a 1% outflow – tends to decline by 0.5 percentage points 
for high-liquidity funds when the banking sector CDS spread increases by one standard deviation. At 0.8 
percentage points, the corresponding decline at low-liquidity bond MFs – from an average 0.8% outflow – is 
larger in statistical terms. The results are qualitatively the same for bond ETFs and prime MMFs. That said, the 
estimated effects on these funds are statistically significant only for one of the subgroups, and neither effect 
results in an outflow when applied to the corresponding average net flow.

Given the high incidence of outflows from bond MFs, we also investigate the evolution of cash buffers in 
that sector at the level of individual funds, again focusing on episodes of high market pressure on banks. For 
each of the four such episodes from 2014 to 2024, we use the initial cash buffer of a bond MF and the change 
of this buffer over the episode. This leads to the binned scatter plot in Graph A1.B. Consistent with previous 
research (Morris et al (2017)), funds with lower cash buffers tend to reduce these buffers by less, or even expand 
them. Thus, such funds not only face larger outflows – as implied by the estimate of equation (1) – but are 
also more likely to sell illiquid assets, which would contribute to a tightening of market conditions.

Investor flows that lead funds to fire sales of assets would be of greater systemic 
relevance if they occur when market pressure on banks is already high. This is the 
case irrespective of whether the fund flows contribute to, or are a consequence of, 
the pressure on banks, or whether the two developments are the joint manifestation 
of external risk factors. Either way, financial stability is jeopardised.

We find that investment fund sectors differ in their tendency to experience such 
destabilising flows. Thanks to salient features of their business models, bond ETFs 
tend to actually attract investors under stress. By contrast, the bond MF sector would 
face large outflows when market pressure on banks escalates. This underscores the 
macroprudential value of containing disruptive redemptions in this sector via reforms 
that reduce the appeal of procyclical redemptions or via liquidity management tools 
that reduce investors’ first-mover advantage (Lewrick and Claessens (2021)). Indeed, 
the Financial Stability Board and the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions have recently published recommendations on this topic (FSB (2023), 
IOSCO (2024)).

Our findings also suggest important avenues for further research. Notably, they 
only indirectly reveal the actual evolution of funds’ sales of risky assets. The impact 
of investor redemptions on the volume of such sales and ultimately on market prices 
may be unstable or highly non-linear. Analyses of this relationship would arise 
naturally in system-wide stress tests (Bank of England (2024)) and would allow for 
more definitive conclusions about the financial stability implications of fund flows.

When the volatility of two observable variables – eg changes to bank credit default 
swap spreads and net investment fund flows – increases, their correlation may also 
increase. This would happen if a common risk factor became more volatile – eg a 
common investor base approached financial constraints. Alternatively, the correlation 
would rise if the reliance on the common investor base intensified or other contagion 
channels between banks and investment funds strengthened. The latter is the 
scenario that Loretan and English (2000) and Forbes and Rigobon (2002) are 
interested in. By generalising an argument in these papers, this annex explains why 
the two alternative scenarios would drive observationally indistinguishable outcomes.

Suppose that the variances and the correlation rise with market pressure in the 
banking sector: 𝑉ு(𝑥) > 𝑉௅(𝑥), 𝑉ு(𝑦) > 𝑉௅(𝑦) and 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟ு(𝑥, 𝑦) > 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟௅(𝑥, 𝑦). Either of 
the following two scenarios could be behind this observation. While the rise in 
correlation stems entirely from the volatility of the common factor in the first scenario, 
the corresponding rise is independent of this volatility in the second scenario.

1. The volatility of the common factor increases and all else stays the same. 
Concretely: 𝜌௫,஺= 𝜌௫,஺෨, 𝜌௬,஺= 𝜌௬,஺෨, 𝜎ఌ,஺

2. At least one of the common factor loadings increases and the volatilities of 
all risk factors rise proportionately. Concretely: 𝜌௫,஺≥𝜌௫,஺෨ and 𝜌௬,஺≥𝜌௬,஺෨ 
(with at least one strict inequality), 𝜎ఌ,஺

If one seeks to disentangle these two scenarios, it is not enough to simply 
observe that both the volatilities and the correlation rise in high-pressure episodes. 
Some identification assumptions are necessary, such as those imposed in Loretan and 
English (2000) and Forbes and Rigobon (2002).

International sources of credit can be a boon to borrower countries in need of capital. But they 
can also be destabilising by enabling domestic credit booms. Before the global financial crisis 
(GFC), internationally active banks drove credit growth by lending both across borders as well as 
locally in the host countries where they operated. Since the GFC, borrowers have increasingly 
turned to international bond markets. This article shows how BIS statistics can help disentangle 
the various international dimensions of credit to borrower economies and describes the role of 
foreign banks and international bond markets in the credit provision process.

In the last half century, borrower countries have been repeatedly rocked by swings in 
international capital flows. The ebb and flow of cross-border credit, often driven by 
changes in investor risk appetite, can expose vulnerabilities and thus be destabilising. 
Before the Great Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2007–09, for example, international banks 
fuelled domestic credit booms in advanced economies (AEs) and emerging market 
economies (EMEs) alike. In the post-GFC low rate environment, many corporate 
borrowers bulked up on foreign currency bonds, mainly denominated in the US dollar. 
Rising dollar borrowing costs since 2020 have curtailed this somewhat, but continued 
dollar appreciation and geopolitical uncertainty have brought questions of debt 
sustainability to the fore yet again.

• 
Rapid international credit growth can enable domestic credit booms, posing risks to financial stability. 
Both direct cross-border credit and indirect cross-border credit bear watching.

• 
Foreign banks operating in domestic markets may enhance credit provision in local credit markets, but 
their cross-border credit tends to dry up first when financial volatility arises.

• 
Foreign currency credit is increasingly intermediated through capital markets rather than through banks, 
which diversifies the sources of credit but also alters the risks.

International credit bears watching, in particular when it grows faster than 
domestic credit. This can enable domestic credit booms, as happened in many 
countries in the run up to the GFC (CGFS (2011)). Direct cross-border credit fuelled 
by a search for yield inflated asset prices, and the resulting rise in collateral values 
further amplified credit growth. Indirect cross-border credit also played a key role in 
many economies by allowing local banks to extend credit in excess of what would be 
sustainable by the domestic deposit base alone.

Borrowing during such boom periods is often denominated in a foreign currency, 
mainly the US dollar. This enables borrowers to take advantage of lower funding costs 
or access larger pools of capital. However, it also creates risk when the borrower’s 
local currency depreciates: higher debt burdens beget higher repayment costs and 
potential defaults. For example, mortgages denominated in low interest rate foreign 
currencies (eg the Swiss franc) were popular in some eastern European countries 
ahead of the GFC. But in its wake, the debt burden ballooned in local currency terms. 
After the GFC, borrowers increasingly took advantage of low long-term rates in bond 
markets. This helped diversify and deepen their access to capital, but also exposed 
them to changes in the risk appetite of international bond investors.

Dynamics in the growth of cross-border credit in part reflect conditions in global 
wholesale funding markets. This makes it important to also consider the composition 
of creditors, how they fund their credit and thus how flighty the credit is. For banks, 
BIS statistics provide useful measures of how much credit is provided by foreign 
banks versus home banks, and how much of the credit is funded and extended locally 
versus across borders. Short-term wholesale funding, which proved to be unstable in 
the GFC (Bruno and Shin (2015), Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010)), is often used to 
fund cross-border credit. Consequently, during periods of financial stress, foreign 
banks tend to withdraw cross-border credit more rapidly than do domestic banks or 
foreign banks operating locally in the country.

The international dimensions of credit growth pose policy challenges (Borio et al 
(2011)). In economies experiencing booms, international credit complicates the job 
of domestic authorities who seek to constrain credit. They have several tools to slow 
the growth of domestic credit but only limited tools to control credit extended by 
institutions abroad. In addition, borrowers may shift from local to foreign currency 
liabilities if local currency rates rise. This can reduce the efficacy of domestic monetary 
policy and ties the economy to interest rate conditions set elsewhere – including in 
international bond markets.

International credit can help economies grow, but a rapid expansion in such credit 
can be destabilising. The BIS international banking statistics (IBS) and global liquidity 
indicators (GLIs) are key resources that provide visibility on three dimensions of credit 
to non-bank borrowers in a particular economy (see Box A): the source of funding (ie 
cross-border or local), the currency of denomination and the identity of the creditor 
(eg a foreign bank, domestic bank or non-bank creditor).

However, international credit can also be indirect. Creditors located in a particular 
country may finance a large share of their own locally extended credit to non-banks 
(ie domestic credit2) with net borrowing from non-residents (from other banks or 
non-banks). Importantly, this indirect cross-border credit allows credit growth to 
outrun domestic deposit growth. This component is often ignored in empirical 
analysis of credit booms, but as discussed below, it has been the marginal source of 
credit in many economies (Ehlers and McGuire (2017), Avdjiev et al (2020)).

International credit is often denominated in a currency that is foreign to the 
borrower. The currency of denomination of credit, regardless of whether this credit is 
extended by banks inside or outside the country, is of particular concern to 
policymakers since sudden moves in the exchange rate can significantly increase the 
debt burden expressed in local currency terms. As of end-Q3 2024, 90% of the total 
direct cross-border bank credit was denominated in five major currencies (USD, EUR, 
JPY, GBP, CHF). As discussed below, borrowing via bond issuance in international 
markets, mainly in US dollars, in part replaced bank borrowing in foreign currencies.

Policy measures such as capital controls and financial regulation can affect the 
channels through which international credit flows. Some of these measures focus on 
direct cross-border credit, while leaving a banks’ intragroup funding alone. Ultimately, 
the mix of direct versus indirect international credit is shaped by policy and by the 
organisation of globally active banks (Hardy et al (2024b)). Thus, focusing on only one 
type of international credit (eg direct cross-border) risks missing important 
developments in other forms (eg indirect cross-border).

Cross-border bank credit can, but need not, give foreign-owned banks an outsize role 
in domestic credit markets. Such non-domestic banks loom large in economies where 
direct cross-border bank credit is a large part of overall credit. But even in economies 
with relatively little cross-border credit, foreign banks can play a pivotal role via their 
local presence in the domestic banking system. While some operate like domestic 
banks, raising deposits in the country to lend locally, others fund their local lending 
with cross-border liabilities. These can take a variety of forms, including interoffice 
funding, wholesale funding or cross-border deposits (Hardy et al (2024b).

The role of foreign banks as credit providers has evolved over the decades. 
International claims (comprising all cross-border lending and local lending in foreign 
currency) expanded through the 1970s and 1980s (Graph 2.A), fuelled by regulatory 
arbitrage, financial innovation and financial liberalisation (McCauley et al (2021)). A 
second wave of expansion preceded the GFC, after which many banks – in particular 
European banks (IMF (2015), McCauley et al (2019)) – retrenched their overseas 
operations. Of the total international bank credit outstanding at end-Q3 2024, an 
estimated 75% was extended by a bank that is foreign to the borrower (black line).

Since the GFC, foreign banks have accounted for a decreasing share of total bank 
credit to EMEs as domestic financial systems have grown. For EMEs as a group, their 
FBP rate fell from over 20% in 2008 to 7% in 2024 (Graph 3.A, blue line). While foreign 
bank credit rose faster than economic activity for much of this period, it was 
overshadowed by the dramatic expansion in credit from domestic banks (Avdjiev et 
al (2024), Hardy (2019)). By contrast, the FBP rate for advanced economies (red line) 
has continued to rise after the GFC.

Foreign banks often, but not always, bring foreign currency credit to borrower 
economies. Their access to foreign currency funding sources makes them a natural 
conduit. They tend to transact much more in foreign currencies than do domestic 
banks (Aldasoro et al (2022)), and their lending can be linked to borrowing costs in 
their home currency (Morais et al (2019)). EMEs with relatively higher FBP rates also 
tend to have a higher share of bank credit denominated in foreign currencies 
(Graph 3.C).3 No such correlation is evident for AE borrowers, which tend to borrow 
primarily in domestic currency regardless of the banks’ ownership. Moreover, many 
domestic banks in AEs are well integrated in the global financial system and thus can 
access foreign currency funds themselves directly or via affiliates abroad.

3 
The declining FBP rates are thus consistent with the declining reliance on foreign currency credit in 
general (Avdjiev et al (2024), Gelos et al (2024)).

Capital markets as a rising force in global finance

While banks remain key providers of foreign currency credit, international capital 
markets have become increasingly important since the GFC (Hardy and von Peter 
(2023)). This development is reflected in the BIS GLIs, which track credit denominated 
in US dollars, euros and yen to non-bank borrowers outside the respective currency-
issuing jurisdictions (Graph 4.A). The major share of credit captured in the GLIs is to 
private sector firms.4 The rise in credit through debt securities occurred as bank 
creditors stepped out after the GFC and non-bank investors stepped in (McCauley et 
al (2015), Shin (2012)). The shift has been particularly stark in EMEs, where the bond 
share rose from almost a third at end-2008 to almost a half in mid-2024 (Graph 4.B). 
The shift towards capital market financing is likely to be even starker if growth of 
domestic capital markets is factored in.5

Greater reliance on capital markets has both pros and cons for borrowers. Debt 
securities allow EME borrowers to tap larger investment pools, which in turn helps 
diversify risks away from banks and across a broader set of investors. Further, EME 
borrowers have been able to obtain credit at tenors that can exceed those generally 
offered by banks. On the other hand, capital markets can be more prone to swings in

The rising bond share in foreign currency credit and the dominant US dollar1 
Graph 4

global risk sentiment, which in turn can affect exchange rates and thereby the ability 
to repay foreign currency credit (Koepke (2019), Hofmann et al (2022)).

The dollar remains EMEs’ foreign currency of choice in both bank and bond credit 
(Graph 4.C). Countries with exports denominated in dollars (eg commodities 
producers) have a natural hedge. But those without such a hedge face both balance 
sheet and rollover risk when the dollar appreciates or when borrowing costs rise. As 
discussed below, the recent dollar appreciation and rising dollar borrowing costs 
make EMEs more vulnerable to sudden changes in investor sentiment.

Implications of international credit for domestic policy

International credit bears watching by policymakers. For one, international credit is 
often the marginal source of credit and can be subject to destabilising reversals. For 
another, the modes of credit extension and funding (ie cross-border vs local) by 
foreign banks affect the stability of their lending (Hardy et al (2024b)). The following 
subsections discuss cases that illustrate these points.

International credit and domestic credit booms

Rapid expansion in international credit can be an enabler of domestic credit booms 
(Domanski et al (2011), Aldasoro et al (2023), Borio et al (2011)). In the run-up to the 
GFC, for example, international credit was the marginal source for borrowers in many 
countries, fuelling a rise in ratios of bank credit to GDP. As the crisis unfolded, 
countries that had relied heavily on such credit saw the largest credit contractions.

The type of international credit matters in these boom-bust episodes. In a sample 
of EME borrower countries, there is a statistically significant relationship between the 
change in the share of direct cross-border bank credit between 2002 and 2008 and

the change in the ratio of bank credit to GDP (Graph 5.A). Importantly, the relationship 
is more pronounced when the more comprehensive measure of international credit 
is used. That is, the rise in the ratio of bank credit to GDP is more tightly related to 
the change in the combined share of direct cross-border credit and indirect cross-
border credit (Graph 5.B). This is seen in the steeper slope of the regression line and 
the much narrower confidence bands for the estimated regression line (yellow lines).

Such indirect cross-border credit can come in different forms. In several eastern 
European countries, foreign banks advanced euros or Swiss francs to their local 
affiliates, which in turn extended foreign currency mortgages to households. Indeed, 
these countries experienced big credit booms with a high share of foreign currency 
credit in mid-2008. By contrast, in Korea, foreign banks advanced dollars to banks in 
the country, but those were not used to fund dollar-denominated assets. Rather, 
banks in Korea bought won-denominated investments that were hedged back into 
dollars using FX forwards (McCauley and Zukunft (2008)). The forward counterparties, 
mostly Korean exporters such as shipbuilders, in effect borrowed dollars by 
contracting to sell future dollar revenues.

As in the boom period, so too in the bust period: international credit drove larger 
swings in activity (Graph 6). Note that here the focus is on the cumulative contraction 
in output (real GDP) during the GFC rather than the change in the ratio of bank credit 
to GDP. Those EMEs most dependent on international credit before the Lehman 
Brothers collapse tended to suffer sharper downturns.6 The share of direct cross-
border credit on the eve of the GFC is only loosely related to GDP growth in the 
following years (Graph 6.A). But once again, the combined (direct plus indirect) share 
of cross-border credit (Graph 6.B) and foreign currency credit (Graph 6.C) are more 
tightly associated with the severity of the downturn.

International credit in EMEs during the pre-GFC boom (Q1 2002–Q2 2008)1 
Graph 5

6 
Berkmen et al (2012) show that financial factors were key in determining the size of the growth impact 
of the GFC. Leverage and the share of short-term debt in GDP are significant explanatory variables in 
various regression specifications. Lending from advanced economies also factors in significantly.

International credit and GDP in EMEs in the post-GFC bust (Q2 2008–Q4 2009)1 
Graph 6

The identity of the lender is another key dimension of international credit. A greater 
share of credit from foreign banks brings both benefits and risks for the borrower. 
Foreign banks, which typically enjoy a broader intragroup support network and 
funding mix, can both bring best practice to domestic markets and increase 
competition that drives cost reductions at domestic banks (Caparusso and Hardy 
(2022), Claessens and van Horen (2014)).

However, for the stability of credit in borrower countries, the source of funding 
matters more than the ownership of the bank (Ehlers and McGuire (2017), Ongena et 
al (2015)). For example, foreign banks operating locally can often rely on support from 
their parent bank (De Haas and van Lelyveld (2010)). In such cases, they can be better 
equipped than domestic banks to handle economic shocks originating in the 
borrower country (Cull et al (2017)). BIS statistics show that, following a local banking 
crisis, local credit extended by foreign banks expands strongly in subsequent years 
(Graph 7.A). Indeed, it is more resilient than local lending by domestic banks (blue 
line). By contrast, foreign banks’ international claims are fickle and tend to disappear.

This ordering of resilience stems mainly from the funding source. International 
credit is more likely to be funded by wholesale funding, which is subject to periodic 
squeezes (Bruno and Shin (2015), Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010)). By contrast, local 
credit, particularly if denominated in the local currency, is often funded by local 
liabilities (eg stable domestic deposits) in the local currency. This matching of 
currencies across the assets and liabilities sides of the balance sheet helps insulate 
creditors from movements in exchange rates (IMF (2015), McGuire and von Peter 
(2016)) and thus tends to be a stabilising force.

However, in the case of global shocks or shocks in a bank’s home country, foreign 
banks can be transmitters of risk to local economies. For instance, a bank that faces 
a shock in one location may adjust its globally consolidated balance sheet, leading to 
credit contractions in other locations (Adams-Kane et al (2017), Peek and Rosengren 
(1997)). During the GFC, banks that racked up larger credit losses saw larger peak-to-
trough contractions in their foreign claims (Graph 7.B) after accounting for borrower- 
and location-specific factors (see endnotes). More generally, banking crises in the 
foreign bank’s home country are followed by a decline in lending abroad, mainly due 
to lower international claims (Graph 7.C).

Low long-term borrowing costs in the major currencies after the GFC led to a nearly 
decade-long rise in foreign currency borrowing by EMEs (Graph 8.A). However, the 
rise in dollar policy rates and sustained dollar appreciation since 2020 have led to a 
steepening of the dollar yield curve, which, in turn, has curtailed this borrowing.

Despite this decline, dollar repayment obligations remain a concern in the 
current environment (Graph 8.C). Changes in policies that affect trade (eg tariffs) – 
and any further appreciation of the US dollar – could put additional pressure on EMEs’ 
ability to repay. Many EMEs are exporters of commodities, goods and services priced 
and traded in dollars. The associated dollar revenue has served as a natural hedge 
against currency mismatches. However, falling sales and commodity prices can 
foreshadow difficulties in servicing their international debt. This debt bears watching 
as trade policies evolve and their impact on the global economy is felt.

The international dimensions of credit growth pose various policy challenges.7

First, in economies experiencing booms, international credit often complicates 
the job of domestic authorities who seek to monitor and constrain credit. For 
example, domestic authorities have several tools to slow the growth of credit 
extended by banks within their jurisdiction. But short of capital controls, the tools to 
measure, much less control, credit extended by institutions outside the country are 
limited. BIS work on the early warning properties of various “gap” variables, in 
particular the credit-to-GDP gap, has proven quite useful in this regard (Borio and 
Lowe (2002, 2004), Borio and Drehmann (2009), Aldasoro et al (2018)).8

Second, the post-GFC push in several jurisdictions for local capital requirements 
and “ring-fencing” of banks’ operations presents its own trade-offs. The longer-term 
implications of such a move are widely debated. While such regulatory changes may 
make banks more stable in the near term, they do so by possibly hampering cross-
border transfers of capital. Policymakers should continue to examine these trade-offs.

8 
In addition, some provisions in the Basel III framework may help policymakers dampen unwanted 
credit flows. “Jurisdictional reciprocity”, as detailed in BCBS (2010), should help promote supervisory 
coordination across jurisdictions. Supervisors in a jurisdiction seeking to dampen cross-border bank 
credit in that jurisdiction can coordinate with supervisory authorities abroad in setting buffer 
requirements on the creditor banks’ cross-border positions.

Finally, policymakers should not lose sight of other challenges that have emerged 
since the GFC. Cross-border bank credit has taken a back seat to bond issuance, much 
of which was absorbed by non-bank creditors (McCauley et al (2015)). Such “non-
bank to non-bank credit” remains opaque because of a lack of data on the 
consolidated holders of the claims. Moreover, it has been less affected by many of 
the post-GFC regulatory initiatives that targeted the banking sector.