# Tunisia Economic Monitor : The COVID-19 Global Pandemic Shock â€“ Summer 2020

Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

With a Special Focus on
the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in Tunisia and

the Tunisia Infrastructure Diagnostic Review

© 2020 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank 
1818 H Street NW 
Washington DC 20433 
Telephone: 202-473-1000 
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions 
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the 
governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, or currency of the data included in this work and does not 
assume responsibility for any errors, omissions, or discrepancies in the information, or liability with respect to the use of or 
failure to use the information, methods, processes, or conclusions set forth. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other 
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal 
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Nothing herein shall constitute or be construed or considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and immunities 
of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this 
work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World 
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Cover photos used with the permission of ShutterStock.com.
Publication design and layout by The Word Express, Inc.

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . الملخص التنفيذيxiii
Résumé Exécutif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvii

1.  Recent Economic and Policy Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Real Sector and Employment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
External Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Public Sector Finances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Monetary Sector and Financial Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

2.  Outlook and Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

Special Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Special Focus 1: The Macroeconomic Impacts of the COVID-19 on the Tunisian Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . .19

COVID-19 Spread in Tunisia: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
Economic Impact of COVID-19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Scenarios of Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
GDP and Sectoral Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Employment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22
Public Finances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Tourism and Remittances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Banking Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Special Focus 2: Tunisia´s Infrastructure: Demonstrated Progress but Mounting Challenges . . . . . . . . . . .27

Reforms to Boost Return on Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

Annex – Selected Economic Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

Figure 1 
GDP Growth Has Slowed to its Lowest Rate in Recent Years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Figure 2 
Growth in 2019 Was Driven by Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Figure 3 
Key Manufacturing Sector Activity (Textiles and Mechanic & Electric) Slowed in 2019… . . . . . . . .2
Figure 4 
…and Petroleum Extraction Declined to Close to Less than Half of its 2010 Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Figure 5 
Tradable Services and Industries Were the Main Contributors to the 2020Q1 Contraction . . . . . .3
Figure 6 
Potential GDP Growth Has Steadily Declined Over the Last Two Decades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
Figure 7 
Unemployment Remains High Especially among Women and Graduates… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Figure 8 
…and is Concentrated in the Interior Regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Figure 9 
The Current Account Deficit and Reserves Improved in 2019… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Figure 10 …as the Trade Balance Shrank in Most Sectors Due to Lower Imports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
Figure 11 Tourist Arrivals Reached an All Time High Thanks to More Neighbor Visitors… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
Figure 12 … Leading to Higher Revenues While Remittances Grew Despite Growth Slowing in Europe . . . .7
Figure 13 EU Countries Are the Major Source of Tunisia’s Remittances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
Figure 14 In 4M 2020 the Trade Deficit Reduced as Demand Weakened . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Figure 15 The Fiscal Deficit and Public Debt Marginally Improved in 2019… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Figure 16 …as Revenues Improved Thanks to Higher Direct Tax Receipts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Figure 17 Government Expenditures Is Dominated by Growing Wages… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Figure 18 …while Subsidies and Transfers Remain High . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Figure 19 Consumer Price Inflation Declined in 2019… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Figure 20 …as BCT Pursued a Less Accommodative Stance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Figure 21 Liquidity and Credit Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
Figure 22 Euro/TND and USD/TND (Average Interbank Rate) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
Figure 23 The Stock Market Index Contracted in 2019 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Figure 24 COVID-19 Directly Impacted Sectors Have Small Stock Market Presence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Figure 25 Strict Lockdown Measures Have Limited COVID-19 Cases in Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Figure 26 Tunisia’s Health Security Ranks in the Bottom Half of World Rankings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Figure 27 The COVID-19 Shock Transmits through Multiple Economic Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Figure 28 Scenarios of COVID-19 Economic Impact in Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Figure 29 The Most COVID-19 Exposed Sectors Can Reduce Overall Growth Significantly . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Figure 30 Number of Jobs in Sectors Most Exposed to the Crisis (2019Q4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Figure 31 Sectoral Employment Elasticities (2011–2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Figure 32 Government Expenditures (TND Million) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Figure 33 Government Revenues (TND Million) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .24
Figure 34 Simulation of COVID Impacts on Public Finances and Financing Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Figure 35 SOE Wage Bill and Operating Expenses are High Relative to their Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .25
Figure 36 Impact on Tourism Revenues (TND Million) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Figure 37 Impact on Remittances (TND Million) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Figure 38 Impact on Remittances (TND Million) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Figure 39 Share of Tunisia’s Population Below the Poverty Line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Figure 40 Tunisia’s Infrastructure Competitiveness Global Ranking (among 137 Countries) . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Figure 41 Net Income of Main Infrastructure SOEs in 2017 After Operating Subsidies (TND Millions) . . . . 29
Figure 42 Vicious Cycle of Declining Utility Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
iv

Table 1 
Tunisia: A Consumption-Driven Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Table 2 
Corporate Tax Rates Have Been Reformed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Table 3 
Tunisia’s Main Export Partners Will Undergo a Severe Recession in 2020 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
Table 4 
Tunisia: Economic Growth Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
Table 5 
Historical Spending on Infrastructure Using International Unit Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Table A.1 Tunisia: Selected Economic Indicators (2017–2023) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33
Table A.2 Tunisia: Key Fiscal Indicators (2017–2023) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

Box 1 
GoT’s Key Economic Support Schemes during the COVID-19 Outbreak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Box 2 
Food and Energy Subsidy Schemes: Background and Pandemic Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
Box 3 
Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

he Tunisia Economic Monitor provides an 
update on key economic developments 
and policies. It examines these economic 
developments and policies in a longer-term and global 
context, and assesses their implications for the outlook 
for the country. Its coverage has ranged from the macro-
economy to financial markets to indicators of human 
welfare and development. It is intended for a wide 
audience, including policy makers, business leaders, 
financial market participants, and the community of 
analysts and professionals engaged on Tunisia.

by Abdoulaye Sy, Majid Kazemi, Zied Ouelhazi 
(Consultant) and Marwen Hikri. The Special Focus 
Section on Tunisia’s Infrastructure was written by 
Rajesh Advani (Senior Water Supply and Sanitation 
Specialist) and Blanca Lopez-Alascio (Consultant) 
under the guidance of Carmen Nonay (Global 
Practice Manager). Shireen Mahdi (Senior Economist) 
provided helpful comments.

Muna Abed Salim (Senior Program Assistant) 
print-produced the report. The team is grateful to the 
Government of Tunisia for its contributions to this 
publication.

The Tunisia Economic Monitor is a product of 
the World Bank’s Global Practice for Macroeconomics, 
Trade and Investment team. This first issue was 
prepared by Majid Kazemi (Economist, Task Team 
Leader), Abdoulaye Sy (Senior Economist), Natsuko 
Obayashi (Consultant) and Marwen Hkiri (Consultant) 
under the general guidance of Eric Le Borgne 
(Global Practice Manager) and Jesko Hentschel 
(Regional Director). The Special Focus Chapter on 
the macroeconomic impact of COVID-19 in Tunisia 
documents a joint assessment with the Government 
of Tunisia at the onset of the crisis and was prepared

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions 
expressed in this Monitor are those of World Bank 
staff and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the Executive Board of the World Bank or the 
governments they represent.

For questions and comments on the content 
of this publication, please contact Majid Kazemi 
(mkazemi@worldbank.org) 
or 
Eric 
Le 
Borgne 
(eleborgne@worldbank.org).

(The data cut-off date for this report was June 
25, 2020).

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
x

نشاطات التعدين واستخراج النفط يف أرجاء البالد كافةً.

.2020 الدينار يف األشهر الخمسة األوىل من العام

القروض ووقف الرسوم عىل املدفوعات والسحوبات اإللكرتونية.

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
xiv

au marché du travail stable, quoiqu’à des niveaux 
faibles, le chômage est resté élevé (14,9 %) en 2019 
et s’est établi à un niveau considérablement plus 
élevé pour les femmes, les jeunes, les diplômés et 
dans les régions de l’intérieur du pays.

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
xviii

RECENT ECONOMIC AND 
POLICY DEVELOPMENTS

thanks to improved security after the terrorist attacks 
of 2015. The Tunisian services sector accounted for 
60 percent of GDP in 2019, while 42 percent of GDP 
consists of tradable services (Figure 2). The other 
main contributor to growth was public administration 
services which over the last decade has seen its 
share in GDP jump from 0.1 percent to 18 percent in 
2019 due to a growing wage bill since the revolution. 
The agriculture sector growth sharply declined by

FIGURE 1  •  GDP Growth Has Slowed to its Lowest

On the supply side, economic growth in 
2019 was primarily driven by the services sector 
(Figure 1). Tradable service grew by 2.2 percent 
in 2019, led by the tourism sector (6.8 percent), 
following the sector’s recovery in 2017 and 2018

Agriculture
Non–manufacturing industries
Manufacturing industries

Source: National Institute of Statistics (INS) and World Bank staff calculations.

FIGURE 2  •  Growth in 2019 Was Driven by

FIGURE 3  •  Key Manufacturing Sector Activity

(Textiles and Mechanic & Electric) 
Slowed in 2019…

Commerce
Hotels and restaurants
Transports

Other tradable services
Post & telecommunication
Financial services

Construction and craft materials
Petroleum refinery
Chemical

10.5 percentage points (pp) due to a lower olive oil 
production of the previous season which was offset 
by a good cereal season.

FIGURE 4  •  …and Petroleum Extraction Declined

to Close to Less than Half of its 2010 
Level

Construction
Water
Electricity and gas
Mining (phosphate)
Petroleum and gas extraction

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
2

FIGURE 5  •  Tradable Services and Industries

FIGURE 6  •  Potential GDP Growth Has Steadily

Were the Main Contributors to the 
2020Q1 Contraction

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

Source: World Bank staff calculations.
Note: Potential growth is estimated as a function of changes in capital stock, labor 
force, and TFP (Solow decomposition).

Source: INS and World Bank staff calculations.
Note: GDP in 2010 constant prices series.

2 
At the beginning of the lockdown, a survey showed that 
60 percent of companies have their orders cancelled 
from abroad (according to a private sector association 
IACE), and in the South region, 81 percent of companies 
stopped functioning.

3 
According to Agency for the Promotion of Industry and 
Innovation (APII), in April, projects implementation fell 
by 86.2 percent, investment plans by 14.1 percent and 
employment by 21.5 percent.

Recent Economic and Policy Developments
3

TABLE 1  •  Tunisia: A Consumption-Driven Growth

Contribution share of 
average annual growth

Contribution in percentage point of average annual growth

1991–1995
1996–2000
2001–2005
2006–2010
2011–2015
2016–2018
1991–2010
2011–2018

GDP growth
4.2
5.6
3.9
4.5
1.8
1.8
100.0
100.0

Exports
2.5
2.5
1.8
2.2
-0.5
1.1
49.1
7.7

Imports
–1.8
–2.2
–1.5
–3.0
0.0
–1.1
–46.6
–22.0

Consumption
2.7
3.9
3.7
3.7
3.3
2.5
76.8
162.8

Government
0.4
0.8
0.7
0.9
0.8
0.7
15.4
41.1

Private
2.3
3.0
3.0
2.8
2.5
1.8
61.4
121.7

Investment
1.0
1.5
0.4
1.4
–0.5
–0.8
23.3
–34.1

4 
The second special focus chapter of this report provides 
a summary diagnostic of Tunisia’s infrastructure.

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
4

5 
The impact of the crisis is not fully reflected as Tunisia 
started the lockdown on March 20, 2020.

FIGURE 8  •  …and is Concentrated in the Interior

Recent Economic and Policy Developments
5

FIGURE 9  •  The Current Account Deficit and

FIGURE 10  •  …as the Trade Balance Shrank in

Other manufactured
Mechanical & electrical
Textiles & clothing

Gross official reserves (RHS)
Current account deficit (LHS)

6 
See the output section for details on oil and phosphate 
production in Tunisia.

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
6

FIGURE 11  •  Tourist Arrivals Reached an All

FIGURE 12  •  … Leading to Higher Revenues While

Time High Thanks to More Neighbor 
Visitors…

Remittances Grew Despite Growth 
Slowing in Europe

France
Germany
UK
Libya
Italy
Algeria
Other countries

Tourism receipts (% GDP)
Remittances (% GDP)
France GDP growth
Eurozone GDP growth
Tunisia GDP growth

Remittances 
edged 
up 
in 
2019 
and 
have averaged at 4.8 percent of GDP since the 
revolution. Historically, remittances to Tunisia have 
followed a counter-cyclical trend and accounted for 4.5 
percent during the higher growth pre-revolution period 
(2005–2010). In 2019, despite slower growth both in 
France (the source of almost 60 percent of remittances) 
and in Tunisia, remittances grew by 15 percent to 
reach 5.1 percent of GDP up from 4.8 percent in 2018 
(Figure 12 and Figure 13). Overall, tourism receipts 
and remittances growths in 2019 (36 percent and 15 
percent respectively) contributed to limit the current 
account deficit.

Recent Economic and Policy Developments
7

FIGURE 13  •  EU Countries Are the Major Source

FIGURE 14  •  In 4M 2020 the Trade Deficit

Other manufacturing industries
Textiles & clothing
Mining
Energy
Agro–food

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
8

FIGURE 15  •  The Fiscal Deficit and Public Debt

FIGURE 16  •  …as Revenues Improved Thanks to

2018
2012
2014
2016
2011
2019
(est.)
2013
2015
2017

Direct tax
Trade tax
VAT
Nontax revenue
Excise
Other indirect taxes

for both private sector and administration. The 
WB has continued to support Government to 
streamline the complex investment and incentives 
schemes and to prepare the new investment law.

Recent Economic and Policy Developments
9

TABLE 2  •  Corporate Tax Rates Have Been Reformed

Onshore company
35%
30%
25%
10% (regional development zones)

10% (small companies, regional development 
zones, employment program)

35% (finance, telecom, energy, large retails, 
and franchising)

* initially introduced for small companies to compensate the 5 percent increase of tax on dividend.

CPI (YoY, %)
Furnishings
Clothing and footwear
Restaurants and hotels

Recent Economic and Policy Developments
13

BOX 2. FOOD AND ENERGY SUBSIDY SCHEMES: BACKGROUND AND PANDEMIC DEVELOPMENTS

Lower energy subsidies: reforms and low oil prices

FIGURE 21  •  Liquidity and Credit Growth

FIGURE 22  •  Euro/TND and USD/TND (Average

M3
Credit to the government
Credit to the economy

Source: BCT and World Bank staff calculations.

2019, and further to TND2.86 as of end-May 2020 
following the lockdown (Figure 22).

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
14

FIGURE 23  •  The Stock Market Index Contracted

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: WB staff calculations using BVMT data.

12 For a background on the banking sector’s structural 
challenges see IMF’s Financial System Stability 
Assessment (2012) and Extended Fund Facility Fifth 
Review (2019) reports.

Recent Economic and Policy Developments
15

FIGURE 24  •  COVID-19 Directly Impacted Sectors

Others
Health
Basic materiels
Services
Industries
Consumption goods
Finance

BOX 3. ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING AND COMBATING THE FINANCING OF TERRORISM

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
16

TABLE 3  •  Tunisia’s Main Export Partners Will Undergo a Severe Recession in 2020

Tunisia’s exports share (%)
GDP growth (%)

Source: WB staff calculations using INS and IMF WEO (Apr and Jun 2020).

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
18

Special Focus 1: The Macroeconomic 
Impacts of the COVID-19 on the 
Tunisian Economy

13 This report presents the main findings of a joint GoT/WB 
assessment conducted in April 2020.

14 The growth factor is defined as the ratio of the number of 
new diagnosed cases in each day to that of the previous 
day. A growth factor of greater than 1 indicates an 
increasing trend of contamination while a value of less 
than one represents a decelerating rate.

FIGURE 25  •  Strict Lockdown Measures Have

FIGURE 26  •  Tunisia’s Health Security Ranks in

Confirmed cases (cumulative) (LHS)
Daily new confirmed cases (RHS)

Source: Global Health Security Index (2019).

The authorities implemented stringent 
health measures to control the spread in line 
with international experiences and World Health 
Organization recommendations. A range of 
health mitigation measures were adopted including 
curfews, confinements, social distancing, closure 
of schools, universities and other public gathering 
spaces, cancellation of public demonstrations and 
ceremonies, border closures, travel restrictions 
internationally 
and 
between 
the 
country’s 
governorates with the exception of emergency travel 
including the repatriation of Tunisians stranded 
abroad. As the curve flattened, a partial and targeted 
containment started in May 4. Finally, On June 4, 
the government reopened hotels, restaurants, cafes, 
mosques, and some cultural activities but enhanced 
sanitary measures were kept in place. The curfew 
ended on June 8 and all land, air and sea borders 
were reopened on June 20, three months after the 
onset of the crisis. These measures were largely 
successfully enforced and well adhered to but some 
social tensions appeared due to economic pressures.

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
20

15 Heavily impacted sectors include textiles, mechanical 
and electrical industries, construction and public works, 
transport services, hotels and restaurants, leisure 
services, trade and crafts.

16 As much as 60 percent of orders were cancelled in 
March, according to IACE’s “Opinion Survey of Business 
Leaders March 2020”.

FIGURE 27  •  The COVID-19 Shock Transmits through Multiple Economic Channels

FIGURE 28  •  Scenarios of COVID-19 Economic Impact in Tunisia

General containment of
more than 2 months

Resurgence of COVID-19 cases
in the last quarter

Simply chain disruption
and significant decline in
external demand

Simply chain disruption
and significant decline in
external demand

Failure to find an effective
treatment or vaccine

Sharp drop in mobility of
people and tourism

Sharp drop in mobility of
people and tourism

Relative control of spread
from June 2020

Relative control of spread
from June 2020

this stage (Reassessment) 
(Re-evaluation in a few months)

Scenario 0 (baseline scenario): no COVID-19

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
22

TABLE 4  •  Tunisia: Economic Growth Simulation Results

Growth (%)
+1.6
–2.9 to –3.4
–4.5 to –5.0

GDP decline compared to S0 (pp)
—
–4.5 to –5.0
–6.1 to –6.6

FIGURE 29  •  The Most COVID-19 Exposed

FIGURE 30  •  Number of Jobs in Sectors Most

–1.75
–1.50
–1.25
–1.00
–0.75
–0.50
–0.25

Textile
Tourism
Transport
Administration

Source: Authors’ calculations.
Note: Numbers in thousands and include informal jobs.

18 In a recent study by the International Food Policy Research 
Institute (IFPRI), job losses would be estimated at 143,000 
for a one-month crisis and 430,000 for a three-month crisis 
in Tunisia but more significant in services and industries 
sectors (IFPRI, 2020). http://ebrary.ifpri.org/utils/getfile/
collection/p15738coll2/id/133737/filename/133947.pdf.

FIGURE 31  •  Sectoral Employment Elasticities

FIGURE 32  •  Government Expenditures (TND

Wage bill
Subsidies
Capital expenditures
Good and services

FIGURE 33  •  Government Revenues (TND Million)

Indirect Tax
Direct Tax
Non-Tax Revenues

High wage bill and operating expenses 
of Tunisian SOEs in a COVID-19 background

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
24

FIGURE 34  •  Simulation of COVID Impacts on Public Finances and Financing Needs

FIGURE 35  •  SOE Wage Bill and Operating

Expenses Are High Relative to their 
Operations

FIGURE 36  •  Impact on Tourism Revenues (TND

FIGURE 37  •  Impact on Remittances (TND Million)

FIGURE 38  •  Impact on Remittances (TND Million)

Crisis generally confined to the real sphere

• Lowering the policy rate
• Creation of new lines of credit
• Relaxation of conditions of liabilities
• Deferral of credit repayment
• Refinancing of banks

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
26

Special Focus 2: Tunisia´s 
Infrastructure: Demonstrated 
Progress but Mounting Challenges

reduce social gaps. Poverty rates have declined in 
urban and rural areas, and fell nationally from 25 
percent in 2000 to 15 percent in 2015 (Figure 39 
Share of Tunisia’s population below the poverty line).

The investments have enabled reasonably 
good access to basic infrastructure services. 
Access to improved water supply and electricity is 
almost universal, and the use of surface water for 
human consumption has virtually disappeared. Ninety-
two percent of the population has access to improved 
sanitation. Tunisia has a dense road network of 20,000 
km and an additional 52,000 km of rural roads. It also 
has eight ports, seven of which engage in international 
trade. The telecommunications network is adequate, 
mobile telephone access is virtually universal, and 51 
percent of the population has access to the internet.

20 Société Tunisienne de l’Électricité et du Gaz (STEG), 
Société Nationale d’Exploitation et de Distribution des 
Eaux (SONEDE), Office National de l’Assainissement

TABLE 5  •  Historical Spending on Infrastructure Using International Unit Costs

1985–1990
1995–2000
2005–2015
1985–1990
1995–2000
2005–2015
1985–1990
1995–2000
2005–2015

Transport
0.1
0.8
0.6
4.2
2.8
2.2
4.3
3.6
2.7

Electricity
1.4
1.1
1.7
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.4
2.0
2.7

Total
1.7
2.2
2.7
5.4
4.0
3.7
7.2
6.2
6.4

FIGURE 39  •  Share of Tunisia’s Population Below

(ONAS), Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer 
Tunisiens (SNCFT), TransTu – public transport and 
light rail, Office de la Marine Marchande et des Ports 
(OMMP), Office de l’Aviation Civile et des Aéroports 
(OACA), Tunis Air and Tunisie Telecom.

21 Based on assumptions from available SOE financial 
statements—years vary by data availability.

22 Estimates from World Bank Public Expenditure Review, 
2019.

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
28

FIGURE 41  •  Net Income of Main Infrastructure

Competitiveness Global Ranking 
(among 137 Countries)

SOEs in 2017 after Operating 
Subsidies (TND Millions)

23 Organization 
for 
Economic 
Co-operation 
and 
Development (OECD).

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
30

FIGURE 42  •  Vicious Cycle of Declining Utility Performance

1. Low tariffs, driven by 
political motives, give 
rise to financing gaps

funds
2. Public funds 
are insufficient 
and poorly timed

Utility vicious cycle trend driven by low tariffs

3. Maintenance is 
neglected
6. Poor technical 
performance drives

5. Customers are not 
incentivized to pay for

4. Operators technical 
performance worsens

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
32

TABLE A. 1  •  Tunisia: Selected Economic Indicators (2017–2023)

2017
2018
(Prel.)
(Proj.)
(Proj.)
(Proj.)
(Proj.)

Real GDP growth (% change)
2.0
2.7
1.0
–4.0
4.2
2.2
2.7

Gross investment (% of GDP)
19.3
18.5
19.2
14.0
14.2
16.0
16.9

Gross national savings (% of GDP)
5.6
7.4
10.3
6.8
7.1
9.2
10.2

Inflation (GDP deflator, % change))
5.2
6.5
6.7
4.9
5.5
3.3
4.7

Total revenues (including grants)
24.3
26.1
28.0
26.4
25.5
26.2
26.6

Total expenditure and net lending
30.5
30.5
31.9
30.4
29.2
28.9
29.3

Overall balance (excluding grants, confiscated 
assets and privatization receipts)

Public debt ratio
70.2
78.0
72.2
83.1
82.8
82.3
79.8

Selected monetary accounts (annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)

Money and quasi-money (M2)
11.6
6.9
8.4
4.8
6.5
7.5
9.1

Credit to the economy
9.4
8.4
3.5
5.3
5.4
5.8
6.2

Policy interest rate (%, eop)
5.00
6.75
7.75
—
—
—
—

Balance of payments (percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Current account balance
–10.2
–11.1
–8.8
–7.2
–7.0
–6.8
–6.7

Trade balance
–13.3
–14.9
–13.9
–10.3
–11.0
–13.2
–13.9

Exports of goods
35.7
38.8
38.7
31.9
37.3
39.6
40.5

Imports of goods
49.1
53.7
52.6
42.2
48.2
52.8
54.5

Foreign Direct Investment
2.0
2.5
2.1
0.5
1.7
2.3
2.5

Gross reserves (US$ billion, eop)
5.6
5.2
7.4
6.3
6.3
7.0
7.6

in months of next year’s GNFS imports 1/
3.0
2.6
4.9
3.8
3.4
3.4
3.4

External debt
57.0
89.4
92.5
98.0
101.6
101.1
96.2

Exchange rate, average (TND/US$)
2.42
2.65
2.93
—
—
—
—

Population (million)
11.5
11.7
11.8
11.9
12.0
12.1
12.2

Nominal GDP (TND million)
96,325
105,597
113,732
114,534
125,907
132,925
142,890

Nominal GDP (US$ billion)
39.8
39.9
38.8
—
—
—
—

GDP per capita (current US$)
3,452
3,452
3,308
3,100
2,994
3,022
3,175

Exchange rate, average (TND/US$)
2.42
2.65
2.93
—
—
—
—

Unemployment rate (% of active population)
15.3
15.4
14.9
—
—
—
—

Source: Tunisian Authorities, IMF estimates and World Bank staff projections.
1 End-of-year reserves over next year’s goods and non-factor services imports.

TABLE A. 2  •  Tunisia: Key Fiscal Indicators (2017–2023)

Overall balance (excluding grants, confiscated assets and privatization 
receipts)

Primary balance
–3.4
–1.9
–1.3
–1.9
–0.7
–0.3
–0.1

Total revenue (excluding grants)
24.3
26.1
28.0
26.4
25.5
26.2
26.6

Tax revenues
24.3
24.0
25.4
23.2
22.5
23.2
23.8

Direct taxes
8.9
8.6
11.1
10.5
9.1
9.3
9.8

Indirect taxes
13.1
15.4
14.3
12.7
13.4
13.9
14.0

Non-tax revenues
2.3
1.9
2.4
2.2
2.8
2.7
2.6

Capital income
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Total expenditures and net lending
30.5
30.5
31.9
30.4
29.2
28.9
29.3

Current expenditures
25.0
24.9
26.6
27.4
26.2
25.3
24.8

Wages and salaries
14.9
14.1
14.7
16.5
15.4
14.9
14.6

Goods and services
1.6
1.1
1.5
1.3
1.3
2.0
2.0

Interest payments
2.7
2.7
2.8
3.1
3.2
2.7
2.8

Transfers and subsidies
6.1
7.0
7.6
6.6
6.2
5.7
5.4

Non allocated (incl. COVID-19 measures)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

Capital expenditures and net lending
5.5
5.6
5.3
2.9
3.1
3.6
4.5

Overall balance (excluding grants, confiscated assets and privatization 
receipts)

General government financing
6.1
4.8
4.1
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.9

Grants, privatization receipts and sales of confiscated assets
0.3
0.4
1.0
1.1
0.3
0.2
0.2

External (net)
4.8
3.6
1.8
0.8
2.2
2.4
1.8

Domestic (net)
1.1
0.8
1.3
3.1
1.5
0.3
0.8

Sources: Tunisian Authorities and World Bank staff estimates and projections.

TUNISIA ECONOMIC MONITOR – THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC SHOCK
34